---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 18
Type (formerly called Item): book 
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 
Article-title: Geoblocking and Global Video Culture
Article-status: accepted
Authors: Ramon Lobato, James Meese, Juan Llamas-Rodriguez, Cameran Ashraf, Marketa Trimble, Adam Rugg, Florian Hoof, Roland Burke, Jinying Li, Çiğdem Bozdağ, Chris Baumann, Aneta Podkalicka, Chris Baumann, Sandra Hanchard, Vanessa Mendes Moreira de Sa, Hadi Sohrabi, Fidel Alejandro Rodriguez, Evan Elkins.
Author-email: rlobato@swin.edu.au, James.Meese@uts.edu.au
Author-bio:
Abstract: Video platforms like Youtube, IPlayer, DailyMotion, Netflix, Periscope and Youku use geoblocking to filter international audiences. Geoblocking and Global Video Culture examines the geography of video streaming across different cultures. Studying the linkages between various blocking and circumvention practices and the tactics people use to get around them. The research decodes the approach to geoblocking in various countries like China, Iran, Malaysia, Turkey, Cuba, Brazil, USA, Sweden and Australia, by analyzing how different users negotiate geoblocking and internet filtering controls. This collection of essays offer a series of distinctive stories about this fast-changing and complex issue. Keywords:internet censorship, copyright, Institute of Network Cultures, video distribution, public sphere, proxy filtering, P2P file-sharing, territorialisation, geographies of control, surveillance, VPN, connectivity, anonymity, IP-address, digital infrastructure, USA, China, Sweden, Turkey, Australia, Malaysia, Brazil, Iran, Cuba, piracy, privacy, streaming aggregation platforms, mobile video culture, authorized and unauthorized channels, site-blocking, circumvention practices 
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
Font(s) used: Open Sans
...

#Preface and acknowledgementsGeoblocking and Global Video Culture is the result of a collaborative research experiment we conducted with the contributors to this book. Our aim was to investigate how online blocking and circumvention are shaping access to digital video in different parts of the world, and explore what this means for screen culture today. Together, we set up a comparative research project around some common questions: What tools are people using to access blocked video content in different countries? What kinds of content are they watching? And what is the political context for these circumvention activities? The chapters collected here are the end result of this collaboration, and a corresponding call for papers. The first section of the book explores the dynamics, histories and possible futures of territorial rights control in various media industries, while the second section compares ground-level circumvention practices in nine countries – Australia, Brazil, China, Cuba, Iran, Malaysia, Sweden, Turkey, and the United States. Given how fast things move in video culture, a book of this nature cannot be definitive. We wanted instead to produce a timely, transnational account of the geoblocking phenomenon, with a comparative dimension that could speak across diverse local experiences. Rather than dense academic prose, our contributors provide vivid snapshots of user practices and provocative reflections on the relationship between geoblocking, government censorship, circumvention, and copyright. We hope you enjoy the eclectic nature of the collection.Of course, we could not have undertaken such a task without the support and assistance of numerous colleagues and friends. We would like to thank Leonieke van Dipten, Geert Lovink and Miriam Rasch at Institute of Network Cultures for their enthusiastic support of the project, Karen Horsley for production assistance, and Sandra Hanchard for the maps and data visualizations. We are also indebted to Philip Branch, Angela Daly, Evan Elkins, Scott Ewing, Dan Golding, Jennifer Holt, Grace Lee, Rebecca Olive, Claudy Op Den Kamp, Hal Roberts, Nic Suzor, Leah Tang, Julian Thomas and Patrick Vonderau, among others, for their advice, support and feedback. Finally, we thank Swinburne University of Technology and the Australian Research Council Discovery programme for funding this project.