---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# China: The Techno-Politics of the Wall

Jinying Li

The Great Firewall (GFW) is one of the most sophisticated and effective
Internet blocking projects, and it functions as a powerful instrument
for censorship in China.[^09LiChina_1] The existence of the “wall,” as both a
technological apparatus and a structure metaphor, is a symptomatic
object of the global media network, shattering the myth of borderless
global access and foregrounding the regulatory power of the
nation-state.[^09LiChina_2] But what makes the wall more meaningful is the
practice of “wall-crossing” (*fanqiang*). As counterprotocols for
tactical media, a series of tools and strategies based on VPNs and proxy
servers have been developed by Chinese users to circumvent the Great
Firewall and to access blocked media content.[^09LiChina_3]

The battle over the GFW reveals the lived experience of (dis)connected
global media flow that is marked by constant struggles between
restriction and access. By investigating the GFW and the practices used
to bypass it, this study aims not just to understand the GFW itself, but
to interrogate the discursive meanings and political outcomes of
technological knowledge, devices, and infrastructures that formed
seemingly invisible, yet deeply prevalent power struggles that affect
identities, decisions, and activities. China’s GFW provides an ideal
case, because it was envisioned, designed, and operated with such a
clear political purpose that the struggle against it would inevitably be
implicated with political meanings. The techno-politics of the wall (and
wall crossing), therefore, manifests the political fabrics that are
embedded in the technical coding of even the most mundane activities in
our ever-changing digital life.

## Between the Wall and the Space: A Brief History 

A wall, as an architectural structure, a metaphor, or an imaginary,
always has certain political connotations that signify uneven power
relations. The Great Wall, built at the dawn of a powerful Chinese
empire, stood as a monument of hegemony for thousands of years. What
makes this mundane object political, however, is not the wall itself,
but the complex relation *between the wall and the space around it*, a
relation that is marked by division, domination, containment, and
control. In the case of China’s Great Firewall, the space it seeks to
divide, dominate, and control is obviously cyberspace, whose imagined
“unruliness” pronounces both threat and vulnerability.

When computers and the Internet were first introduced to China, they
were seen as technological opportunities for economic growth and were
highly promoted by the Chinese government. Since the early 1990s, China
has invested significantly in network infrastructure, and its Internet
user base has expanded at exponential speed. By 2015, China had 668
million Internet users, the largest number in the world, and it is
moving toward a fast-growing information society with over 3.35 million
websites and 250 million microbloggers (China’s equivalent of
Twitter).[^09LiChina_4]

Amidst such an eye-catching cyber boom, one of the fastest growing areas
is video consumption. Currently, there are 433 million Chinese online
viewers. Demand for online videos is so strong that some describe
Chinese cyberspace as an “entertainment highway” instead of an
“information highway.”[^09LiChina_5] The proliferation of video-sharing services,
such as Youku, Tudou, Xunlei, LeTV, and Bilibili, further nurtured a
dynamic video culture including cell-phone movies, Flash animations,
spoof videos, and amateur journalism.[^09LiChina_6] What is missing from this
vibrant cultural scene, however, is the world’s most popular
video-sharing platform, YouTube, which is blocked by China’s Great
Firewall. Also blocked are Vimeo, Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Blogspot,
as well as many human rights and democracy-related websites, blogs, and
forums.[^09LiChina_7]

The GFW was built at almost the same time as the space it sought to
contain was dramatically expanding. Described as “networked
authoritarianism” or “authoritarian informationalism”, the Chinese
government’s intertwined efforts to foster and control information
networks highlight the fundamental tension in post-Socialist China,
which struggles between the economic reform toward free-market
neoliberalism and tightening political coercion.[^09LiChina_8] In 1996, a list of
foreign websites was blocked in China for the first time. In 1997, the
government issued the Computer Information and Internet Security
Protection Management Regulation, a far-reaching law to dramatically
tighten information control online. A comprehensive project was
initiated in 1998 and launched in 2003 to systematically monitor,
filter, and regulate Internet traffic between China and the outside
world. The GFW was soon recognized as the world’s most sophisticated and
ambitious system for information control.

The construction of the GFW was never officially announced or
acknowledged. Its existence, however, is widely known, because its
effects are constantly experienced by hundreds of millions Internet
users in China. Whenever they try to get onto YouTube or search for a
“sensitive word” (*mingan ci*), a page appears with the error message:
“404 page not found”. The interface of blockage is so blatantly
confrontational that Chinese users often characterize the GFW as an
action instead of an object. Thus the “wall” is sometimes spoken of as a
verb and a blocked access attempt is described as being “walled”
(*beiqiang*). The ways in which a certain website can be “walled” are
diverse and comprehensive. These include DNS pollution, IP blocking, URL
filtering, TCP packet inspection, and Man-on-the-side attack.[^09LiChina_9]

It is widely believed that the purpose of the GFW is to block foreign
content of a political nature – the kind of information sources that Min
Jiang describes as “international deliberative spaces”.[^09LiChina_10] A closer
look, however, reveals that many of the blocked sites are actually
coming from inside China, which are nevertheless pushed outside because
they deal with sensitive topics such as human rights, democracy, and
even the GFW itself. For instance, Bullog.cn, a Chinese blogging site
founded in Beijing, was shut down by the government in 2007, forcing the
site to be moved to an international server which was then blocked by
the GFW. Many popular blogs faced the same fate when the Chinese
blogsphere was subjected to tightened control. Thus when people climb
over the wall, what they often see is information about domestic affairs
from domestic sources.[^09LiChina_11] What the wall really achieves is not simply
to stop outside contents from coming in, but to purge out the unwanted
information from inside. Therefore, by blocking video-sharing sites such
as YouTube and Vimeo, what are in fact blocked are not videos from the
U.S. but underground films, documentaries and citizens’ reportage *from
China*. **The wall, by and large, is an effective weapon for information
abjection**.

In China’s enormous information control systems, the GFW is only a small
component. But the public response to the GFW is far more pronounced,
because its blockage of international portals is tremendously blunt,
with entire services such as Google rendered inaccessible. Such
bluntness in its denial of access results in a highly visible encounter
with void and disconnection (e.g. the “404 Not Found” message), and thus
makes the GFW an iconic symbol of network control. The symbolic meaning
is highlighted by the popular nickname itself, which is less
metaphorical than allegorical. The affective experience generated by the
GFW resonates with the widespread feelings of entrapment, suppression,
and control in people’s daily life online and offline. Thus the
experience with, and the imagination of, the “wall” are often evoked to
express the public anger and anxiety toward many different forms of
suppression that go far beyond Internet control. “If you are arrested,
your freedom curtailed, your posts deleted, these can also all be cases
of being ‘walled.’”[^09LiChina_12]

The construction of the GFW is both technical and discursive. It is not
only a technological project but also a cultural and political one. Its
formation has to be mapped in the broader landscape of Chinese popular
media forms that have transformed dramatically in the past decades from
state propaganda to commercial entertainment. A huge gap thus emerged
between the market and content-controlled official media, a cultural
void that has to be filled by illicit activities. In film culture, for
instance, piracy created an alternative public sphere that functions as
a powerful underground circuit to evade censorship.[^09LiChina_13] In a similar
fashion, an illicit practice was quickly developed and popularized among
Chinese netizens to circumvent the Great Firewall and to create an
alternative cultural space outside it.

## Crossing the Wall 

Ever since the GFW was built, there have been efforts to bypass it.
Countless circumvention tools based on proxies, VPNs, and encryption
technologies were developed and adopted. They are described as “ladders”
(*tizi*). Popular ladders include Tor (The Onion Router), FreeGate (a
proxy network system), Ultrasurf (a freeware based on proxy servers and
encryption protocols), I2P (the Invisible Internet Project, a free,
open-source program for pseudonymous information transfer), Psiphone (a
combination system developed by the Citizen Lab at the University of
Toronto), and GoAgent (a cross-platform software). Other new weapons are
constantly emerging, including VPN Gate (a free public-minded VPN
service), Lantern (a P2P network where users share bandwidth), Pritunl
(a enterprise distributed VPN server), Shadowsocks (a socks5 server),
FreeBrowser( a free Internet browser for Android systems), and Fqrouter
(a circumvention router for Android systems).

The battle between the wall and wall crossing is fierce and continuous,
and all these tools have to be updated frequently in order to remain
functional. New technological developments such as cloud computing and
IPv6 also pose challenges to the GFW and provide more ladders for wall
crossing. Information about how to circumvent the GFW, where to download
the tools, and how to use them is abundant on the Internet, though some
of this information is censored in China. Since many of these
circumvention tools are free, open-source projects, they are often
hosted at GitHub, a source code management network where programmers
collaborate and share information. Most users obtain circumvention
software through email or P2P file sharing, and the latter proves to be
particular effective because of its highly distributed structure. Many
local vendors even sell computers and cellphones with pre-installed
circumvention programs.

Due to the underground nature of wall crossing, it is difficult to
estimate how many Chinese users practice circumvention. There have been
conflicting reports about the size and impact of the wall-crossing
community. In 2014, Globalwebindex reported that there are 93 million
Chinese VPN users, which amounts to 20% of total Internet users in China
and is the largest number in the world.[^09LiChina_14] The actual impact of
circumvention, however, cannot be simply measured by its popularity.
Since the GFW has become so visible and ubiquitous, circumvention talk
is also widespread in everyday life. Online popular culture is full of
references to the GFW, mostly in the form of jokes or spoofs. The public
awareness of, and the widespread antagonism toward, the GFW is reflected
in the popular anger toward its claimed creator, Fang Binxing, the
former president of Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunication
who is widely known as the “father of GFW”.[^09LiChina_15] Fang’s university
website was often hacked by angry netizens and was once replaced with
“Angry Shoes,” a video game that imitates *Angry Birds* and features
Fang as a villain to be attacked by flying shoes.

## The Right to Look: Popular Video Cultures Inside and Outside the Wall

The impact of the wall and wall crossing is especially visible in
Chinese video culture, because the government is particularly wary of
photo- and video-sharing sites such as Flickr and YouTube.[^09LiChina_16] This
emphasis on visual culture continues the Chinese Communist Party’s
longtime belief in the propaganda function of images, which is
manifested in its especially harsh censorship over cinema that remains
the most tightly regulated medium in China. As moving images become
increasingly digitized and net-based, the control over looking
inevitably leads to tightened restriction of video-sharing platforms,
especially when the proliferation of portable and affordable digital
devices resulted in a flourish of amateur journalism that radically
challenges official media. With the recent rise of mass demonstrations,
dubbed “public incidents” (*gonggong shijian*) in China, the images
produced and shared by citizen journalists play an important role in
recording, publicizing, and mobilizing such events. Thus, it is not
accidental that the GFW’s first blockage of YouTube in 2007 coincided
with the aftermath of the mass protest in the city of Xiamen against the
construction of a chemical plant. Cellphone videos recorded at the
Xiamen protest were widely circulated on the Internet, generating heated
public debate about China’s environmental problems. Months later,
YouTube was walled.

The GFW’s tight control over video access generated popular upheaval in
Chinese cyberspace, which was largely shaped by the collective
sentimentality of the so-called post-80s generation. Born in the 1980s
when China just began its economic reform, the post-80s generation came
of age amidst the skyrocket boom in both economy and popular media. They
are the first generation to witness the spread of television, computers,
and the Internet in Chinese households, and thus became the first group
of avid media consumers in China. Growing up in the age of
globalization, this generation is also decidedly cosmopolitan. Their
increasing desire for global media is the major force that drives the
fierce battle against the GFW. This is also a generation who is most
familiar with a wide variety of illicit digital practices, such as
piracy, hacking, P2P file sharing, and jail breaking, which form a rich
cultural and technological environment for practicing alternative media
access against various forces of restriction.

The cultural sensitivity of the post-80s generation determines that
their challenge to the GFW often takes the form of popular, lowbrow
entertainment, including pornography. In fact, the crusade against
pornography is frequently the official excuse to tighten censorship. To
access to pornographic videos, therefore, often becomes the reason to
breach the GFW. For instance, when Japanese porn star Aoi Sora
encouraged her Chinese fans to follow her on Twitter, many did so
despite Twitter being blocked. She was thus credited for “having brought
down China’s Great Firewall.”[^09LiChina_17] Sometimes, such a seemingly benign
desire for obscenity can deliver quite subversive messages. In 2009, the
Chinese government launched a dramatic “anti-smut” campaign, whose true
purpose however was to censor information about a pro-democratic online
petition. Right in the middle of the campaign, an imaginary creature
named “Grass Mud Horse” (*cao ni ma*) became a huge Internet phenomenon
after a series of widely circulated online videos attracted millions of
viewers. The videos feature cute images of an alpaca-like animal as the
embodiment of the homophone of a sexually charged profane curse, which
expresses public anger toward censorship in a hilarious manner. Although
the videos were quickly banned in Chinese cyberspace (but can be
accessed on YouTube), the phenomenon continued in countless Internet
memes, video games, toys, and even clothing lines that all referenced
the lovely animal.

![](media/image1.png)

Fig 1: The Grass Mud Horse became a popular expression of resistance to
internet censorship source: (CC BY-SA 2.0/chumsdock)

Equally provocative is the animation series *Kuang Kuang*, which was
created by artist Pi San and his independent studio Huxiao Animation.
The first installment of the series, *Bombing the School* (*Zha
Xuexiao*), was released in 2008 on the Chinese video-sharing site Youku
and became an instant hit that attracted millions of views. Combining
youthful cuteness with rebellious violence, the video creates a dark,
humorous metaphor of the oppressive social intuitions in China. Despite
(or because of) its popularity, the video was banned from domestic sites
and had to be re-posted on YouTube, requiring viewers to bypass the GFW
to watch it. To avoid further trouble from the censors, subsequent
videos in the *Kuang Kuang* series were divided into two groups: the
seemingly benign ones were released on Chinese domestic sites for
general viewers and the politically challenging ones were posted on
YouTube for those who know how to cross the GFW. Such a practice
reflects a popular strategy taken by Chinese artists and filmmakers who
use the GFW (and wall crossing) as a shield from censorship. The GFW, in
this regard, functions as the political division among different
content, platforms, and target audiences.

The division between what is inside and outside the GFW is marked by the
peculiar function of YouTube as an effective distribution channel for
Chinese underground films and videos that are barred from domestic
release. Widely regarded in China as a “free” space beyond the control
of censorship, YouTube has become a popular platform for Chinese
independent filmmakers to publish those works that are considered
“sensitive”, most of which are documentaries about political issues and
historical subjects. Artist Ai Weiwei’s critically claimed documentary
*Disturbing the Peace* (*Lao Ma Ti Hua*, 2009) was primarily circulated
through YouTube. Ai and his studio also established their own YouTube
channel to distribute a series of documentaries that they produced as
part of “citizens’ investigation” (*gongmin diaocha*), which probed
China’s human-rights abuse with in-depth reportage. Similarly, filmmaker
Ai Xiaoming’s investigative documentary series on the Sichuan earthquake
and Hu Jie’s historical documentaries on the Cultural Revolution all
rely on YouTube as the crucial, if not the only, distribution platform.
For Chinese filmmakers and audiences, to release, share, and consume
these underground documentaries is to challenge the wall, the existence
of which is both the pre-condition for and the obstacle to evade
censorship. It is disconnection and blockage, instead of connection and
access, that highlight the intermediary function of YouTube as a
political platform.

The wall-crossing tools have also increasingly been used to access
peer-to-peer file-sharing portals that recently became the new targets
of the GFW. For the most part, the Chinese government expressed little
concern with online piracy despite the continuous pressure from foreign
rights-holders. But in recent years, websites for several major P2P
networks established by fansubbing communities (dubbed *zimuzu* in
Chinese) began to be blocked. One of the first fansub networks blocked
by the GFW was doulan.net, run by a group of Chinese fans who translate,
subtitle and share documentaries made by the Japanese TV network NHK.
Some of these documentaries are about Chinese history and politics,
which made many suspect that the true purpose of such blockage was less
copyright protection than information censorship. In fact, P2P networks
have long functioned as a powerful underground channel for cultural
circulation that evades not only the corporate ownership of copyright
but also state censorship of content. The GFW’s blockage of P2P networks
signals the government’s growing effort to suppress this otherwise
unruly domain that used to operate outside the system of culture
control.

## The Techno-Politics of the Wall and (Re)politicization of the Space

Neither YouTube or fansub is in itself political. Nor is the practice of
wall crossing. In most cases, the GFW is bypassed simply to access
apolitical content and services. However, the discursive formation of
the wall, as well as the subsequent cultural imagination of it,
inevitably politicize almost every notion and activity that interacts
with it. As the wall becomes a symbol of political oppression, crossing
the wall is thus taken as a practice of political activism regardless of
individual purpose and motivation. The concentration of Chinese
underground documentaries on YouTube, for example, suggests a popular
imagination of a free, open space of political resistance outside the
wall, despite the fact that this outside space is itself a discursive
construction. Although YouTube fashions itself as a transparent,
neutral, and apolitical service, its blockage by the GFW exposes the
unseen struggle between access and restriction.[^09LiChina_18] Similarly, we are
now seeing a conscious gathering of like-minded Chinese activists on
Twitter and Google+, the social networks blocked by the GFW and thus
imagined as oppositional spaces. In fact, the most famous and widely
followed Chinese Twitter accounts, such as Isaac Mao, Michael Anti,
Hexie Farm, Rebel Pepper, and China Digital Time, all belong to
well-known activists and dissidents, who took the social network as an
organization platform for political resistance. For these activists, to
access Twitter is to cross the wall, which is an action of political
transgression.

For those who are not engaged with political activism, the decision of
whether, why, or how to circumvent the GFW is no less political, because
the discursive formation of the wall has profoundly politicized almost
all aspects of Chinese cyber life. We can see this in many
technology-related online forums, most of which discuss wall-crossing
tactics. One prominent example is the famous blogger Program Think
(*biancheng suixiang*), who initially set up his blog mainly to discuss
computer techniques. The blog took a radical turn in 2009 when its
hosting site, BlogSpot (owned by Google), was blocked by the GFW. The
blogger thus began to share and promote circumvention strategies, and
posted in-depth political discussions on such issues as democracy,
authoritarianism, corruption, and even revolution. The blog posts
quickly became more political than technical.[^09LiChina_19]

The politicization comes as a surprising turn after two decades of
massive de-politicization in China since the Tiananmen Massacre in 1989.
The daily encounter with the wall, I would argue, plays a significant
role, because it discloses the hidden contradiction in the imaginary
network that is supposed to promise a transparent, effortless, and
limitless delivery of information. The network, managed by the principle
of protocols, is as much an apparatus of control as a distributive
platform.[^09LiChina_20] The Great Firewall is precisely such a controlling
apparatus based on protocols. As a structure and a metaphor, however,
the wall makes what is invisible visible. It embodies the power of
control in its structural function, graphic connotation, and cultural
imagination. The wall enables a precious space for political struggle
precisely because it opens up visible gaps and disconnections. As
Alexander Galloway and Eugene Thacker argue: “Protocological struggles
do not center around changing existent technologies but instead involve
discovering holes in existent technologies and projecting potential
change through those holes.”[^09LiChina_21] The wall generates those holes through
missing links, blocked contents, and error messages. And that is where
counterprotocols­­ —the wall-crossing tactics— emerge and exploit,
politicizing our mundane technological life of searching, browsing, and
networking.

## References: 

Anderson, Daniel. 'Splinternet Behind the Great Firewall of China.'
*Queue* 10, no. 11 (November 2012): 40-49.

French, Howard W. 'Great Firewall of China Faces Online Rebels', *The
New York Times*, 4 February 2008,
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/04/world/asia/04china.html.

Galloway, Alexander R. *Protocol: How Control Exists After
Decentralization*. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.

Galloway, Alexander R., and Eugene Thacker. *The Exploit: A Theory of
Networks*. Minneapolis, Minn: University of Minnesota Press, 2007.

Gillespie, Tarleton. 'The Politics of "Platforms"', *New Media &
Society* 12. 3 (2010): 347-64.

Globalwebindex. 'GWI Social Q3 2014: The Latest Social Networking
Trends', 18 November 2014,
https://www.globalwebindex.net/blog/social-q3-2014.

Goldsmith, Jack L., and Tim Wu. *Who Controls the Internet?: Illusions
of a Borderless World*, New York: Oxford University Press, 2008.

'Great Firewall Father Speaks Out'. *Global Times*, 18 February 2011.

Guo Liang. *Surveying Internet Usage and Its Impact in Seven Chinese
Cities*, Center for Social Development, Chinese Academy of Social
Sciences, 2007.

Jacobs, Katrien. *People’s Pornography: Sex and Surveillance on the
Chinese Internet*, Intellect Books, 2012.

Jiang, Min. 'Authoritarian Deliberation on Chinese Internet',
*Electronic Journal of Communication* 20.3&4 (2009).

———. 'Authoritarian Informationalism: China’s Approach to Internet
Sovereignty', *SAIS Review* 30. 2 (2012): 71–89.

Li, Jinying. 'From "D-Buffs" to the "D-Generation": Piracy, Cinema, and
an Alternative Public Sphere in Urban China', *International Journal of
Communication* 6. 0 (April 12, 2012): 542–63.

MacKinnon, Rebecca. 'China’s "Networked Authoritarianism"', *Journal of
Democracy* 22. 2 (2011): 32–46.

Raley, Rita. *Tactical Media*. Minneapolis: University Of Minnesota
Press, 2009.

The Blog of Biancheng Suixiang. http://program-think.blogspot.com/.

Tsui, Lokman. 'An Inadequate Metaphor: The Great Firewall and Chinese
Internet Censorship', *Global Dialogue* 9. 1/2 (2007): 60–68.

Voci, Paola. *China on Video: Smaller-Screen Realities*. London:
Routledge, 2010.

Xiao, Qiang. 'The Battle for the Chinese Internet', *Journal of
Democracy* 22. 2 (2011): 47–61.

Xuecun, Murong. 'Scaling China’s Great Firewall', *The New York Times*,
17 August, 2015,
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/18/opinion/murong-xuecun-scaling-chinas-great-firewall.html.

[^09LiChina_1]: The term ‘Great Firewall’ was first coined by *Wired* magazine,
    and it was quickly adopted by Chinese people and media.

[^09LiChina_2]: Jack L. Goldsmith and Tim Wu, *Who Controls the Internet?:
    Illusions of a Borderless World*, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    2008.

[^09LiChina_3]: The notions of 'counterprotocols' and 'tactical media' are
    borrowed from: Alexander R. Galloway and Eugene Thacker, *The
    Exploit: A Theory of Networks*, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
    Press, 2007; Rita Raley, *Tactical Media*, Minneapolis: University
    of Minnesota Press, 2009.

[^09LiChina_4]: Data Source: China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC),
    *The 36th Statistical Report on Internet Development in China*, 23
    July 2015.

[^09LiChina_5]: Guo Liang, 'Surveying Internet Usage and Its Impact in Seven
    Chinese Cities', Center for Social Development, *Chinese Academy of
    Social Sciences*, 2007.

[^09LiChina_6]: Paola Voci, *China on Video: Smaller-Screen Realities*, London:
    Routledge, 2010.

[^09LiChina_7]: The list of blocked websites and media platforms is constantly
    changing. Google, for instance, has been blocked and unblocked
    recurrently. For a real-time monitoring of the list of blocked
    websites, IPs, and webpages, see: https://en.greatfire.org.

[^09LiChina_8]: Rebecca MacKinnon, 'China’s "Networked Authoritarianism"',
    *Journal of Democracy* 22. 2 (2011): 32-46; Min Jiang,
    'Authoritarian Informationalism: China’s Approach to Internet
    Sovereignty', *SAIS Review* 30. 2 (2012): 71–89.

[^09LiChina_9]: Daniel Anderson, 'Splinternet Behind the Great Firewall of China',
    *Queue* 10. 11 (November 2012): 40-49.

[^09LiChina_10]: Min Jiang, 'Authoritarian Deliberation on Chinese Internet',
    *Electronic Journal of Communication* 20. 3-4 (2009).

[^09LiChina_11]: Murong Xuecun, 'Scaling China’s Great Firewall', *The New York
    Times*, 17 August 2015,
    http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/18/opinion/murong-xuecun-scaling-chinas-great-firewall.html.

[^09LiChina_12]: Xuecun, ‘Scaling China’s Great Firewall’,

[^09LiChina_13]: Jinying Li, 'From "D-Buffs" to the "D-Generation": Piracy,
    Cinema, and an Alternative Public Sphere in Urban China',
    *International Journal of Communication* 6 (2012): 542-63.

[^09LiChina_14]: Globalwebindex, 'GWI Social Q3 2014: The Latest Social Networking
    Trends', 18 November 2014,
    https://www.globalwebindex.net/blog/social-q3-2014.

[^09LiChina_15]: 'Great Firewall Father Speaks Out', *Global Times*, 18 February
    2011.

[^09LiChina_16]: Howard W. French, 'Great Firewall of China Faces Online Rebels',
    *The New York Times*, 4 February 2008,
    http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/04/world/asia/04china.html.

[^09LiChina_17]: Katrien Jacobs, *People’s Pornography: Sex and Surveillance on
    the Chinese Internet*, Intellect Books, 2012, p. 38.

[^09LiChina_18]: On the politics of YouTube, see Tarleton Gillespie, 'The Politics
    of "Platforms"', *New Media & Society* 12. 3 (1 May, 2010): 347–64.

[^09LiChina_19]: See: 'The Blog of Biancheng Suixiang',
    http://program-think.blogspot.com/.

[^09LiChina_20]: Alexander R. Galloway, *Protocol: How Control Exists After
    Decentralization*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.

[^09LiChina_21]: Galloway and Thacker, *The Exploit*, 81.
