---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 18
Type (formerly called Item): book 
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 
Article-title: Geoblocking and Global Video Culture
Article-status: accepted
Authors: Ramon Lobato, James Meese, Juan Llamas-Rodriguez, Cameran Ashraf, Marketa Trimble, Adam Rugg, Florian Hoof, Roland Burke, Jinying Li, Çiğdem Bozdağ, Chris Baumann, Aneta Podkalicka, Chris Baumann, Sandra Hanchard, Vanessa Mendes Moreira de Sa, Hadi Sohrabi, Fidel Alejandro Rodriguez, Evan Elkins.
Author-email: rlobato@swin.edu.au, James.Meese@uts.edu.au
Author-bio:
Abstract: Video platforms like Youtube, IPlayer, DailyMotion, Netflix, Periscope and Youku use geoblocking to filter international audiences. Geoblocking and Global Video Culture examines the geography of video streaming across different cultures. Studying the linkages between various blocking and circumvention practices and the tactics people use to get around them. The research decodes the approach to geoblocking in various countries like China, Iran, Malaysia, Turkey, Cuba, Brazil, USA, Sweden and Australia, by analyzing how different users negotiate geoblocking and internet filtering controls. This collection of essays offer a series of distinctive stories about this fast-changing and complex issue. Keywords:internet censorship, copyright, Institute of Network Cultures, video distribution, public sphere, proxy filtering, P2P file-sharing, territorialisation, geographies of control, surveillance, VPN, connectivity, anonymity, IP-address, digital infrastructure, USA, China, Sweden, Turkey, Australia, Malaysia, Brazil, Iran, Cuba, piracy, privacy, streaming aggregation platforms, mobile video culture, authorized and unauthorized channels, site-blocking, circumvention practices 
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
Font(s) used: Open Sans
...


#Circumvention, Media Sport and The Fragmentation of Video Culture

###James Meese and Aneta Podkalicka###

##Introduction 

Lurid tales of football officials pocketing millions hit the headlines
following the recent FIFA scandals The reporting rightly shone a light
on corruption in football, but also drove home a basic fact: sport is
awash with money. This is largely because television networks spend a
significant amount on purchasing rights to major sporting events. To
provide a few brief examples, Fox Sports has paid over \$400 million
(USD) in 2011 for the rights to the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cups[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_1]
and NBC has paid \$7.65 billion (USD) for the right to broadcast the
Olympics from 2022 to 2032 in the U.S.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_2] These sums are so large that
nowadays professional sporting clubs at the highest level earn the bulk
of their income from the influx of money earned from the sale of
broadcasting rights, rather than from gate receipts or merchandising.

Sport is able to demand this level of investment because there is a
strong viewer preference for mediated live sport, which in turn is a
unique form of modern screen content. Live sport is one of the last
program genres that require people to watch it at a particular time. This is unlike most other programs, which can be provided on-demand (as we have seen elsewhere in this collection). This in turn means that live
sport stands as a reasonable financial investment for media companies.
By purchasing exclusive rights to popular sporting contests, networks will have access to an interested audience, which can be on sold to advertisers.

Rights deals between sporting organisations and television networks are
managed through a complicated geography of contractual agreements.
Sporting organisations maximize their income by selling limited
exclusive rights to networks, allowing them to sell the same content to
multiple national markets. For example, the aforementioned \$400 million
World Cup deal made in the United States of America, sits alongside
other deals FIFA makes with broadcasters in Australia, India and so on.
This relationship provides benefits for both parties. Sport offers
television networks compelling content that can help build a loyal
audience and rights deals stand as a direct source of revenue for
sporting organisations as well as a marketing and public relations
outlet.

In order for this system to work, both television networks and sporting
organisations depend on geographical exclusivity. However, these claims
to geographic exclusivity are currently being challenged by a range of
alternative models and viewing practices that circumvent these broadcast
arrangements: live-streaming; using circumvention technologies such as
VPNs to access geoblocked content; uploading highlights on social media
platforms; and purchasing cheap overseas cable decoder boxes. We examine
these circumvention practices, which vary in their scope and levels of
informality, and explore how they are fragmenting the sporting video
landscape and offering new sites of consumption for fans.

##Beyond the Traditional Sporting Broadcast: Challenging Exclusivity

Media sport stands as an interesting case study to explore changing
media geographies because of the sector’s resilience and longevity. It
has arguably managed to weather the digital transition with more aplomb
than other screen cultures and genres (for example, film or television
serials). Television networks are investing heavily in broadcasting
rights for sporting contests, without having to worry about Netflix-like
competitors. But as a consequence of this apparent lack of competition,
television networks generally assume that audiences’ engagement is
granted through the provision of high-quality, innovatively produced
sporting content, which feeds this sense of exclusivity. But as a
consequence of this apparent lack of competition, television networks
tend to hold a series of assumptions about how people will watch sport.
In short, it is presumed that audiences will engage with high-quality,
innovative broadcasts. So these days most sporting broadcasts feature
high definition cameras, novel camera angles, and a range of visual and
audio content, from heat maps to theme songs.

Sports organisations also often stream games online either under a paid
subscription model or for free depending on the rights arrangement. For
example, the Australian Open tennis championship is customarily
broadcast free to air on the national commercial station *Channel 7*.
However, in 2015 the station’s Seven Sport website also featured live
streaming, which during the tennis tournament, and for Australia-based
audiences, showed parallel matches played across multiple courts. The
stream also provided real-time coverage from hot spots from around the
Melbourne Park such as players’ backstage entrance or training sessions.
The 2014 FIFA World Cup offers another example. The event offered live
streaming as part of its global coverage and was retrospectively
promoted as ‘the biggest multimedia sporting event in history, with more
people watching matches and highlights online than ever before’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_3]
However, this live streaming is still something that happens under the
auspices of the sporting organisation and their broadcast partners. It
provides flexibility and diversity to viewers and can expand the
audience of an event or competition, but the control and branding of
this content is still of paramount concern to the media, event
organisers and promoters.

Furthermore, while these rights deals are structured around exclusivity,
it is important to note that in the current media landscape
‘exclusivity’ is a malleable concept. Live sport is seen as a
particularly precious resource and the *in situ* broadcast is strongly
protected by rights-holding networks. This ability to broadcast the game
live is a major drawing card for networks. But once the result is known,
the game itself becomes less valuable, both in an economic sense, and in
terms of the sporting competition. Highlights start circulating on the
news programmes of competing networks, the event’s tension dissipates
and the original network’s exclusivity immediately diminishes.
Furthermore, the live blogging and tweeting of sporting broadcasts (or
indeed, of live games), as well as the commentary that takes place on
radio stations, contributes to this dilution of the game’s exclusivity
by offering another location for fans to engage with the game. This
commentary could supplement an official broadcast, but in some
circumstances it could just as likely replace it (for example, if it was
difficult to access an official broadcast).

Geography also plays a role in the diminishing this exclusivity. The
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) – a public broadcaster -
broadcasts Match of the Day (MotD), a popular Association Football
highlights show, and also streams it on their VoD service. However,
their streaming service is restricted to the United Kingdom ostensibly
so individuals who have not paid a television license fee are unable to
get access to it. Similarly, the United States cable network ESPN
geoblocks their Watch ESPN streaming service for non-US audiences.
MLB.TV goes so far as to enforce ‘online blackouts in the geographical
area covered by a baseball club’s local television market when they
play’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_4] This of course drives circumvention, as subscribers aren’t
able to watch the team they care about most online: their local one.
Other geo-sequestering is more nuanced. The 2006-2007 Ashes series was
broadcast online for ‘free to Australian users, while overseas users
were charged a fee’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_5] This is not so much a ‘block’ as a ‘hurdle’,
one that still allows for access but only through a tiered system
defined through geography.

While many fans are happy to pay for live sports, these examples show
why some fans might willingly circumvent geoblocking. Our study of these
various practices not only give us some insight into how and why
circumvention takes place in a particular media industry, but also show
the implications of circumvention. The mediation and corporatisation of
sport has generally been premised on the delivery of a unified video
broadcast in real time, with some localization (such as local
commentary). However, circumvention drastically fragments these points
of reception with audiences now able to watch sport in a number of
different ways. As we will see below, these options are often quite
different from the existing broadcast and so we suggest that
circumvention is not just about access, but about sustaining alternative
consumption preferences, which are often not catered for in the dominant
forms of sporting broadcast.

####Circumvention Practices in Media Sport####

Circumvention in media sport occurred from the 1970s onwards, thanks to
flexible consumer technologies like VCRs, which gave audiences with
greater control over the content they were accessing. Brett Hutchins
notes that ‘\[u\]nauthorised video dubbing and illegal access to cable
and satellite sports television channels was’ a practice undertaken in
many countries, ‘but these activities … had a relatively minor effect
upon profitability in the media market’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_6] Unsurprisingly, the
Internet has intensified opportunities for circumvention practices, and
here we outline some of the most common methods. However, we leave a
discussion around one of the most novel methods, the use of the live
streaming app Periscope, to Adam Rugg and Ben Burroughs in Chapter X.

####Unauthorized live-streaming websites####

One prominent practice is the live streaming of sporting content on
websites such as *Wiziwig* or *ATDHE*, which offer free unauthorized
streams of sporting events as they occur. They provide access to a
diverse range of content from UEFA Champions League matches and college
basketball games to specialist cable television channels (such as ESPN).
The sites are relatively easy to find but they are also unreliable, with
feeds occasionally being shut down, suffering playback problems or
allowing advertising content that blocks the sporting content. They
present content broadcast in a variety of languages, and come across as
fairly minimalist in terms of user interface – simply offering links to
feeds and no other content. Often, in the middle of viewing, the feed
can be cut off entirely, as Florian Hoof details in the chapter that
follows. Alternatively sites mimic the aesthetic of a professional
sports site, with better website design, in order to attain some
legitimacy with their audience. However, the general minimalism of the
sites offers a protection against rights holders. The limited
information available means that unofficial live streams are notoriously
difficult to stop while a sporting event is occurring.

These websites stand as the most serious threat to rights holders. They
impinge on the most prized possession of sports TV broadcasters: the
live audio/visual broadcast of a sporting event. They also disrupt the
carefully organized geography of broadcasting rights, offering an
unrestricted broadcast to individuals from across the globe. It is no
surprise that ‘media sport industry professionals’ dislike these sites,
which are ‘very easy to create and very difficult to shut down’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_7] It
is also worth noting that it is not prohibitively difficult to upload a
stream of a sporting match for online broadcast, to the extent that
walkthroughs are available online.

####Circulation of Game Replays

An alternative circumvention tactic is based around a number of
websites, which host delayed highlights of games after the match has
finished. At first glance these sites look professional and appear to be
an authorised place to consume content. Their status as “grey” locations
for sporting content are well disguised through competent web-design, a
clear site structure and the prominent display of game highlights.
However, these websites often feature copyright infringing content. The
only way they stay clear of lawsuits is by sourcing content uploaded by
individuals hosted on third party video hosting websites (such as
DailyMotion or MetaCafe). We will turn to one of the more prominent
sites, footytube.com to show how this negotiation takes place.

Footytube deploys three specifically customized search aggregation bots,
which scan the open web for content (bots are small programs that run on
the internet). The bot service runs ‘through millions of webpages each
day, aggregating and semantically analysing … niche specific and timely
football related datasets’. They graze a number of intermediary video
sharing websites, sourcing edits from users all over the world. However,
the bots are unable to tell whether the content is under copyright or
not. This method produces an archive of football highlights for sports
fans after each game as well as indemnifies Footytube from any claims of
copyright infringement.

The global reach of this operation means that Footytube’s audience
engages with sports content at an awkward angle: poor quality footage
and foreign commentary often forms part of their media experience.
Roughly edited ‘official’ broadcasts, such as Sky Sports broadcasts of
the F.A. Premier League are likely to be swiftly removed, as the
broadcasts contain obviously copyrightable material in the form of
graphics, post-match analysis and theme songs. This means that secondary
broadcasts from other countries (for example, a Russian broadcast of a
Premier League game) tend to be left up the longest on these sites.
However, industry professionals tend to see these services as ‘an
irritation’, an issue we will discuss later in this chapter, because
unlike live sport, there is a limited audience for delayed content.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_8]

![](imgs/MeesePodkalicka-Image1.png)

Figure 1. Highlights aggregated by footytube.com from youtube.com. The
YouTube account associated with this footage has since been terminated

####Conventional Circumvention Tools

Sporting audiences also use commercial Virtual Private Networks and
Domain Name System proxy services in order to evade geoblocking,
assigning themselves another location in order to access geoblocked
content. These services promote their ability to make sporting content
easy to access. UnoTelly for example makes it clear that individuals can
access the BBC, Canal+ or ESPN from anywhere in the world. Access to
sporting content is also positioned as a predominant use of these
products, with advice site *The VPN Guru* providing guides on how to
access geoblocked content for the ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 and NCAA
March Madness.

This practice engages with legitimate distribution geographies in a
strange way. A VPN or DNS allows individuals to access licensed content,
which is hosted on an authorized platform such as the BBC or ESPN.
Individuals subsequently access content in a radically different fashion
from unauthorized third party sites. For all intents and purposes they
are recognized as someone with legitimate access to the site, despite
the fact that they are residing in an unauthorized geographical
location. With the geographic delineation of rights such a central part
of the sports broadcasting landscape, the use of circumvention
technologies challenges this distribution strategy, which has been in
place for some time.

####Fan Recordings on Social Media

Another phenomenon that has emerged in recent years is people posting
sporting content on social media platforms, either during or after a
match. This practice came to mainstream attention during the 2014 FIFA
World Cup, when six-second videos of goals from World Cup matches
started to appear online. Hosted on the (Twitter-owned) social media
platform *Vine*, short six-second videos (or ‘Vines’) started to be
shared across Twitter and Facebook and were also utilized in online
sports reporting. The videos were often of goals scored during the
match, but also captured humorous moments such as boring commentary or
the Columbian team playing a practical joke on their teammate. Often
people created Vines by recording footage playing on a television
screen, offering a strange double layering to the short video. Vines are
particularly conducive to sporting content, allowing fans to quickly
view highlights from the previous night, and offering a way for
journalists to embed relevant footage into their online reports.

However, during the final week of the World Cup, FIFA and its
rights-holding partners ESPN and Spanish-language Univision started to
issue takedown notices, arguing that these Vines were infringing their
copyright. This frenzy of activity even led to the Vine accounts of
major media companies being taken down. These debates around the
publication of fan recordings further underlines the tensions between
established geographies of rights and the de-territorialization the
Internet affords. As an aside, it is also interesting to note that while
all corporate organisations – including sporting organisations – enjoy
it when a deliberately selected piece of content goes viral, losing
control over this process is often treated as a direct threat to their
business model.

####Parallel Imports of Cable Decoders

Our final example is a practice that constitutes, perhaps, one of the
most ingenious methods of circumvention: paying for a cheaper cable
service from a foreign cable provider. Portsmouth publican Karen Murphy
stands out as the most prominent example of this strategy. She
challenged the FA Premier League’s agreement with Sky to provide the
station with exclusive rights by signing up with the Greek television
provider NOCA who provided her with ‘a decoder box and a NOVA viewing
card’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_9] This allowed her to screen the Greek broadcast of Premier
League matches in her pub. Her reason for doing so was because while SKY
commercial subscriptions cost £700 per month, Murphy only paid £700 a
year for the Greek Nova subscription.

The Premier League hired Media Protection Services (MPS) to conduct an
investigation, and MPS went on to sue Murphy. She was found guilty of
copyright infringement. However, Murphy appealed the decision, until it
eventually found its way to the High Court of England. The High Court
then asked the European Court of Justice (ECJ) to provide advice how
these issues related to the EU Treaty. The ECJ found that Murphy as an
individual was legally able to purchase a subscription. However, the EJC
noted that publicans could not use this loophole in order to support
commercial activities. Following this advice, the High Court quashed
Murphy’s conviction but noted that the case was incredibly complex and
the finer legal points of the issue were still yet to be determined.

It is worth noting that many pubs use unauthorized live-streaming
websites *in addition* to parallel imported cable or legally obtained
subscriptions in order to meet the demands of their patrons. Matthew
David and Peter Millward discovered that if football games couldn’t be
found through their parallel imported cable, publicans would often hook
a computer up to the television and watch it from an online stream.
Alternatively, a publican noted that if fans from different teams were
attending his pub, he would show one broadcast through the parallel
imported broadcast and another ‘through on that screen or that screen
\[points to two large televisions\] from the computer \[an Internet
live-stream\]’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_10]

This shows how circumvention practices often work in tandem with each
other and one suspects, perhaps even with legal methods of distribution.
These practices are often about supplementing existing distribution
infrastructures rather than replacing them. In the case of the two sets
of fans, we can also see how circumvention assists in what could be
viewed as both a social and economic transaction. The publican is
expanding their own customer base, addressing audience demand and
managing social relationships. When we consider the history of football
fan violence or even the good-natured tensions between two local teams,
the provision of multiple games at a local pub is no small matter.

##(Un)authorised Circumvention Practice

These circumvention practices don't emerge out of thin air. Sporting
organisations and media networks are actively cultivating some of them,
even though they run counter to their dominant narratives of fidelity,
quality and exclusivity. For example, while takedown notices used to be
sent to third-party sites in order to prevent the circulation of game
replays, sporting organisations are starting to manage these practices
in more nuanced ways. A sporting executive noted that rather than taking
down content posted on YouTube, through the platform’s Content ID
system, it’s easier for ‘content creators to register \[…\] content as
theirs’ and then any money made from the content, ‘goes back to the
content creator rather than the person who has uploaded it’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_11]

However, when it comes to live streaming websites, which directly
challenges authorized geography of live sporting event broadcasts,
rights holders take a more punitive stance. Third party companies are
regularly employed to not just shut down illegal streams, but to also
recoup any advertising money that had been earned from the adverts
placed ‘against those illegal streams’.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_12] U.S. Homeland Security went
so far as to seize ATDHE’s original domain in 2011, although the site
has continued to operate under a new domain name. These examples
reinforce the point made throughout this article, that the threats to
live broadcasts, are the ones that rights holders respond most strongly
to.

##The Fragmentation of Digital Sporting Video Cultures##

The circumvention practices outlined above directly challenge
assumptions about content, which are embedded in the geographically
exclusive agreements made between sporting organisations and media
companies. The traditional sports broadcasting model presumes that fans
want to watch live sports in high definition, with fidelity and quality
are presented as standardized and idealized forms of content
consumption. However, as the table below shows, when it comes to
circumvention technologies, only accessing live-streamed FTA broadcasts
through VPN provides a level of quality equivalent to a legitimate
broadcast. In contrast, other methods, such as watching Vines or
accessing highlights on Footytube dramatically impact on the quality of
the sporting content. Viewers regularly come across pixelated footage,
foreign language commentary and delayed coverage. Even cable that has
been parallel imported suffers from a decline in audio and visual
quality. While the broadcast is of a high standard the fact that the
commentary is in a foreign language might impact on the enjoyment of the
game.


| Platform  | Do you need to pay  |Timing   |Geographic restriction   | 'Quality'  |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| TV (Satellite)  |Yes| Live  | Yes  | Excellent  |
| TV (FTA)  | Sometimes  | Live  |  Yes | Excellent|
|Parallel Import TV|   Yes|  Live | No  |Average   |
|TV (FTA) through VPN| Yes| Live |No|Excellent|
|Live Streaming|  No | Live | No|Average to Poor|
|Vine| No  | Slight Delay | No  | Poor |
|YouTube/Other Third Party Site| No  |Delay of a few hours| No  | Average to Poor  |
|Skype|  No | Live  | No  | poor  |
|Website| No  |Delay of a few hours| No  | Average to Poor  |

Figure 2: A breakdown of the relationship between geographic
restriction, cost and quality

Collectively, this shows that when it comes to watching sport, audiences
tend to weigh up quality against other factors. Obviously, when it comes
to geoblocking and circumvention, access is a key motivator. This means
that people might accept ‘poor’ or ‘average to poor’ coverage (see the
above table) in order to circumvent geoblocking and watch a sporting
match. However, as David and Millward’s interviews with publicans
show,[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_13] economic and social factors also play into decisions about
quality and circumvention practices. One publican only set up an online
live-stream when two sets of fans came to the pub wanting to watch two
separate games. While being able to cheaply provide for two groups of
fans is clearly a boon for the publican financially, the willingness of
fans to watch an unreliable live-stream shows how particular forms of
sociality and long-standing sporting cultures can also drive access
(i.e. wanting to watch your team at your local pub), as opposed to
purely economic considerations (i.e. not wanting to pay for access to
sporting content).

The considered rejection of quality for economic or social reasons by
audiences has implications for how we think about the consumption of
sporting content. Firstly, it challenges the dominant narrative of
innovation that typifies broadcast media outlets, which revel in showing
audiences the latest data analytics tools or replay cameras. While these
features are of interest to sporting audiences, due to poor quality of
the feed or recording, they are often not easily discernible when
engaging in many of circumvention practices detailed above, However, the
fact that these circumvention practices keep occurring, show that these
top-down ideas about innovation and the general turn towards
high-definition sport, is not an essential part of the mediated sporting
experience.

Secondly, this rejection of quality sets up alternate sites of
consumption which points to the interesting fact that people are
experiencing mediated sport in a range of different ways. When it comes
to video content, a person may just follow a football league through
Vine highlights, with each goal commentated by a fervent fan in front of
their television (rather than by a jaded ex-pro). The footage will be
pixelated and the edits jumpy, but the heart of the game – the goal –
will be legible. A fan might jump on Footytube and regularly watch
highlights of their favourite team with additional Russian commentary.
Alternatively, a tennis fan might watch an obscure ATP tour match on a
live-streaming service and join in a live chat box that pops up
alongside the stream. In each of these cases we see new constellations
of media sport cultures forming and a series of diverse fan engagements
occurring online.

Further to this, the fact that sport does not rely on language as much
as a narrative driven drama means that this consumption occurs in a much
more flexible cosmopolitan fashion than other consumption achieved
through geoblocking circumvention. Much of the media accessed through
circumvention is either diasporic in its nature, with expats often
sourcing media content from their home country, or read through a
particular form of Western hegemony (e.g. everyone trying to access U.S.
Netflix). However, while there is still a Western bias present, sports
fans are likely to engage in more transnational forms of consumption.
This is because sports can still be understood without the restrictions
of spoken language, as a sort of lingua franca. Circumvention practices
may help a hardcore football fan watch the African Nations Cup or an
Australia tennis fan watch an ATP tour match in Swedish. This suggests
that sport is more amenable to these sort of transnational exchanges
than other forms of media.

As a final point, we note that the access of authorized sites through
circumvention tools, presents conceptual (rather than economic)
challenges for broadcasters and sporting organisations, particularly
with regards to public-service broadcasters (PSB) like the BBC. Jock
Given argues that the ‘Online Age’ has turned national broadcasters into
international broadcasters, and it is an impossible task to try and
reinstate the sort of national localism that was predominant the
broadcast television era.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_14] However, the practice of geoblocking
public-service broadcasters does just that. Travelling citizens and
expats are unable to access streamed content on national broadcasters
without the use of a VPN.

The cultural importance of media for expat and diasporic populations,
including sporting content cannot be understated. Tom Evens and Katrien
Lefever note that public service broadcasters play a central role in the
European sports media landscape, and that these broadcasters ‘pioneered
sports coverage on grounds of nation-building and cultural citizenship’,
and suggest that moving sport to ‘subscription-based platforms’ raises
issues around cultural citizenship.[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_15] This account underlines the
historical tensions that circulate around the geoblocking of public
service media. On occasion, small-scale infringement has assisted in
supporting the media consumption habits of diasporic populations or in
archiving old media texts. One could potentially view the use of VPNs
and DNS proxies to access PSB by these citizens in a similar fashion. Of
course, the circumvention of geoblocking by non-citizens is a different
matter and raises a more complex set of questions for PSBs.

##Conclusion##

Thanks to the preponderance of various circumvention practices, sporting
video culture has fragmented. Because of this we see other interesting
trends emerge. Audiences are displaying a negotiable approach to quality
when looking to access geoblocked content. New forms of consumption also
emerge from these practices, with six-second Vines of goals and amateur
edits of highlights uploaded on video hosting platforms, letting people
engage with sport in a different way. The use of VPNs also contributes
to both a diasporic and at times opportunistic cosmopolitan sporting
video culture, with both expats and international audiences watching and
in turn ‘de-territorialising’ sporting content. All of this suggests
that when it comes to locating media sport in the future, we will be
addressing a growing selection of distinct but interrelated sites rather
that a sole ‘official’ broadcast. Paradoxically, in the search for
access to official broadcasts, sports fans have conjured up an emergent
petri dish of sporting video cultures – ripe for further study.

##References##

‘2014 FIFA World Cup Breaks Online Streaming Records’, FIFA.com, 7 July
2014, [http://m.fifa.com/aboutfifa/news/newsid=2401405.html](http://m.fifa.com/aboutfifa/news/newsid=2401405.html).

Boyle, Raymond. ‘Battle for control? Copyright, Football and European
Media Rights’, *Media, Culture & Society* 37.3 (2015): 359-375.

David, Matthew and Peter Millward. ‘Football's Coming Home?: Digital Reterritorialization, Contradictions in the Transnational Coverage of
Sport and the Sociology of Alternative Football Broadcasts’, *The British Journal of Sociology* 63.2 (2012): 349-369.

Evens, Tom and Katrien Lefever. ‘Watching the Football Game: Broadcasting Rights for the European Digital Television Market’, *Journal of Sport & Social Issues* 35.1 (2011): 33-49.

Gantz, Walter and Nicky Lewis. ‘Sports on Traditional and Newer Digital Media: Is There Really a Fight for Fans?’, *Television & New Media* 15.8
(2014), p. 760-768.

Given, Jock. ‘Bringing the ABC Back Home’, *Inside Story*, 16 May 2014,
[http://insidestory.org.au/bringing-the-abc-back-home/](http://insidestory.org.au/bringing-the-abc-back-home/).

Hutchins, Brett. ‘Robbing the World’s Largest Jewellery Store’? Digital
Sports Piracy, Industry Hyperbole, and Barriers to an Alternative Online
Business Model’, ANZCA 2011, Waikato, New Zealand, 5-8 July, 2011,
[http://www.anzca.net/documents/anzca-11-1/refereed-proceedings-3/495-hutchins-anzca-2011-1/file.html](http://www.anzca.net/documents/anzca-11-1/refereed-proceedings-3/495-hutchins-anzca-2011-1/file.html),
p. 6.

Hutchins, Brett and David Rowe. *Sport Beyond Television: The Internet, Digital Media and the Rise of Networked Media Sport,* New York, Routledge: 2012, p. 362.

‘IOC awards Olympic Games Broadcast Rights to NBC Universal through to
2032’, Official Website of the Olympic Movement, 7 May 2014, [http://www.olympic.org/news/ioc-awards-olympic-games-broadcast-rights-to-nbcuniversal-through-to-2032/230995](http://www.olympic.org/news/ioc-awards-olympic-games-broadcast-rights-to-nbcuniversal-through-to-2032/230995).

Longman, Jere. ‘Fox and Telemundo Win U.S. Rights to World Cups’, New
York Times, 21 October 2011,
[http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/22/sports/soccer/fox-and-telemundo-win-us-rights-to-2018-and-2022-world-cups.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/22/sports/soccer/fox-and-telemundo-win-us-rights-to-2018-and-2022-world-cups.html).

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_1]: Jere Longman, ‘Fox and Telemundo Win U.S. Rights to World Cups’, *New York Times*, 21 October, 2011, [http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/22/sports/soccer/fox-and-telemundo-win-us-rights-to-2018-and-2022-world-cups.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/22/sports/soccer/fox-and-telemundo-win-us-rights-to-2018-and-2022-world-cups.html).

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_2]: ‘IOC Awards Olympic Games Broadcast Rights to NBC Universal
    through to 2032’, *Official Website of the Olympic Movement,* 7 May, 2014, [http://www.olympic.org/news/ioc-awards-olympic-games-broadcast-rights-to-nbcuniversal-through-to-2032/230995](http://www.olympic.org/news/ioc-awards-olympic-games-broadcast-rights-to-nbcuniversal-through-to-2032/230995).

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_3]: ‘2014 FIFA World Cup Breaks Online Streaming Records’, *FIFA.com*,
    7 July 2014, [http://m.fifa.com/aboutfifa/news/newsid=2401405.html](http://m.fifa.com/aboutfifa/news/newsid=2401405.html).

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_4]: Brett Hutchins, ‘Robbing the World’s Largest Jewellery Store’? Digital Sports Piracy, Industry Hyperbole, and Barriers to an Alternative Online Business Model’, ANZCA 2011, Waikato, New Zealand, 5-8 July, 2011,
    [http://www.anzca.net/documents/anzca-11-1/refereed-proceedings-3/495-hutchins-anzca-2011-1/file.html](http://www.anzca.net/documents/anzca-11-1/refereed-proceedings-3/495-hutchins-anzca-2011-1/file.html),
    p. 6.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_5]: Brett Hutchins and David Rowe, *Sport Beyond Television: The
    Internet, Digital Media and the Rise of Networked Media Sport*, New York, Routledge: 2012, p. 362.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_6]: Hutchins, ‘Robbing the World’s Largest Jewellery Store’, p.1.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_7]: Hutchins, ‘Robbing the World’s Largest Jewellery Store’, p. 4.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_8]: Hutchins, ‘Robbing the World’s Largest Jewellery Store’, p. 4.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_9]: The details of this case can be found at *Murphy v. Media
    Protection Services* \[2012\] EWHC, 466,
    [http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Admin/2012/466.html](http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Admin/2012/466.html).

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_10]: Matthew David and Peter Millward, ‘Football's Coming Home?:
    Digital Reterritorialization, Contradictions in the Transnational Coverage of Sport and the Sociology of Alternative Football Broadcasts’, *The British Journal of Sociology* 63.2 (2012): 360.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_11]: Raymond Boyle, ‘Battle for control? Copyright, Football and
    European Media Rights’, *Media, Culture & Society* 37.3 (2015): 370.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_12]: Boyle, ‘Battle for control?’, p. 371.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_13]: Matthew David and Peter Millward, ‘Football's Coming Home?’, p.
    360.

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_14]: Jock Given, ‘Bringing the ABC Back Home’, *Inside Story*, 16 May
    2014, [http://insidestory.org.au/bringing-the-abc-back-home/](http://insidestory.org.au/bringing-the-abc-back-home/).

[^06MeesePodkalickaGeoblockingandSport_15]: Tom Evens and Katrien Lefever, ‘Watching the Football Game:
    Broadcasting Rights for the European Digital Television Market’,
    *Journal of Sport & Social Issues* 35.1 (2011): 37.
