---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 18
Type (formerly called Item): book 
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 
Article-title: Geoblocking and Global Video Culture
Article-status: accepted
Author: Ramon Lobato, James Meese, Juan Llamas-Rodriguez, Cameran Ashraf, Marketa Trimble, Adam Rugg, Florian Hoof, Roland Burke, Jinying Li, Çiğdem Bozdağ, Chris Baumann, Aneta Podkalicka, Chris Baumann, Sandra Hanchard, Vanessa Mendes Moreira de Sa, Hadi Sohrabi, Fidel Alejandro Rodriguez, Evan Elkins.
Author-email: rlobato@swin.edu.au, James.Meese@uts.edu.au
Author-bio:
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
...


# Turkey: Coping with internet censorship 

###Çiğdem Bozdağ###

####DATABOX{.statbox}
- 54%: Proportion of the Turkish population who have access to the
internet
- 60TL (US\$20): Monthly cost for a 50/mbit fiber connection
- 94%: Proportion of mobile phone subscribers in Turkey
- 31%: Proportion of Turkish internet users who made online purchases in
2014

####
![Figure 1: This image promoting DNS proxies circulated widely during the
2013 Istanbul protests. Translation: "DNS - let your bird sing" (Author
unknown)](imgs/BozdagImage1.png)
*Figure 1: This image promoting DNS proxies circulated widely during the
2013 Istanbul protests. Translation: "DNS - let your bird sing" (Author
unknown)*

In recent years the acronyms DNS and VPN have entered into the everyday
vocabulary of Turkish internet users. Since 2007, when Law No. 5651 was
passed giving Turkish authorities unprecedented regulatory powers over
the internet, thousands of websites including YouTube and Twitter have
been blocked. Most internet users became aware of this issue after
YouTube was blocked sporadically from 2007 to 2010. During this period,
users started to look for other ways to access the site and started
using alternative DNS providers as a solution. At this time, it was easy
to find hundreds of articles, tutorials and posts in Turkish about how
to change your DNS settings and access blocked websites through a simple
online search. However, when Twitter and YouTube were blocked (again) in
March 2014, the most commonly used DNS providers were also blocked. This
in turn has prompted many Turkish internet users to take up VPN services
that allow them access to banned websites.

Media freedom has always been a problematic issue in Turkey. Freedom of
expression is restricted by laws that include quite broad definitions of
crimes such as “defamation of Atatürk”, “threats against the unity of
the state”, “threats against national security” or “defamation of
religion”. Although communication rights improved in the early 2000s
under the AKP (Justice and Development Party), the situation seems to
have worsened in recent years, especially after the 2013 Gezi protests
when hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets in Istanbul
against the Erdoğan government. Since then, the government has attempted
to put pressure on mass media outlets and introduce stricter control
measures for online content. A change to the law in 2014 enabled the
blocking of websites within 24 hours, in the absence of a court order,
by the Telecommunications Communication Presidency and the Ministry of
Transport, Maritime Affairs and Communication. This leads to the
arbitrary blocking of many websites in Turkey that are critical of
government policies.

Given this political situation in Turkey, VPN, DNS and proxy services
have become important tools to circumvent censorship and access content.
In this sense, circumvention practices in Turkey have evolved in
response to local political conditions. The key issue here is access to
blocked social networking and video sites, especially YouTube and
Twitter. Using VPNs to access commercial streaming sites like Netflix is
not popular – partly because Turks have long used P2P networks and, more
recently, illegal streaming sites to access TV content, films and music.
Piracy became the norm for consuming video content in Turkey long before
legal streaming services were available. In other words, the online
video culture in Turkey is marked on the one hand by internet
censorship, and pirate consumption of videos on the other.

## Internet Use and Video Consumption in Turkey

Although Turkey is one of the world’s fastest growing countries in terms
of internet adoption, the digital divide is still a crucial issue to
consider. According to the Statistical Institute of Turkey (TUIK), only
54% of Turks are online and only 45% of the population uses the internet
regularly, at least once a week.[^11BozdagTurkey_1] In general, young people go online
much more than older people, men much more than women, and people in
urban areas much more than in rural areas. However, in recent years
overall internet adoption has increased tremendously in all population
groups, especially through mobile internet subscriptions.

Looking at people’s reasons for using the internet, we can say that
social media – including Facebook, YouTube and Twitter – is a major
driver. Facebook is the third most visited website in Turkey, and a
majority of the population are Facebook users. According to TUIK, 67% of
users look for information about goods and services when they go online
and 59% use the internet to download games, images, films or music.[^11BozdagTurkey_2]

Turkey, with its growing economy and young population (the average age
is 30), is considered a promising market for internet services and ICTs
generally. Digital technology is of growing importance to the economy
more generally, and more and more online shops and services are
emerging. More than a quarter of Turks use online shopping services, and
the number is growing steadily.[^11BozdagTurkey_3]

Watching and downloading videos is one of the most common internet
activities of the Turkish users. Video streaming makes up a growing
proportion of overall internet traffic, especially among mobile users.
YouTube, the fourth most visited website in Turkey, is far and away the
most popular video service, followed by DailyMotion and various other
local and international sites including 59Saniye, İzlesene, Vimeo and
UzmanTV. Unlike the other video portals, UzmanTV is a professional video
site featuring expert advice on topics such as beauty and health.
Facebook and newspaper websites such as Hurriyet and Milliyet are also
increasingly used for streaming videos.

Besides video platforms such as YouTube, İzlesene or DailyMotion, there
are many illegal streaming websites that offer links to Turkish and
foreign TV series. These “series websites” often use Russian or Asian
video platforms such as VK that are more difficult to control through
national regulation. They even offer subtitles for foreign content. Most
of these offshore video services target the Turkish diaspora as well as
viewers in Turkey. Websites such as Canlidizi.tv or Dizist.com are
popular among Turks living in Germany, home to the largest Turkish
expatriate community, and in the United States. Some of these series
websites focus on Turkish content, while others concentrate on subtitled
foreign series. There are also similar illegal streaming services for
watching movies, and these are quite popular in Turkey.
FullOnlineFilmİzle and HDFilmiFullizle are two examples – both are among
the 100 most visited websites in Turkey.

Legal streaming alternatives are starting to emerge. Examples include
Tivibu and Tvyo, which began operation in 2010 and in 2012 respectively.
Turkish TV channels have also started to provide streaming content via
their own websites, after a late start. User numbers for these legal
services are increasing. However, offshore video services such as
Netflix and Hulu are not yet very popular in Turkey. While some early
adopters have taken up offshore streaming – as can be seen in
discussions in Turkish tech blogs and forums such as DonanimHaber – most
Turkish internet users are used to accessing series and videos for free
and are not ready to pay for streaming services.

One example for this was the popular TV series *Ulan İstanbul*, which
was cancelled by the Kanal D channel in 2015. Following a backlash by
fans, the producers decided to offer the series online via a
pay-per-view model. Although more than a million people watched the
first online-only episode of the series, which was available for free,
the subsequent episodes could not keep up with the series’ former
success and *Ulan İstanbul* was cancelled. This again shows that
although Turkish internet users are increasingly paying for online
services and buying products online, paying for on-demand videos or
streaming services is still not a common practice.

## Internet Censorship, Circumvention and Resistance Practices

Internet regulation in Turkey was introduced in the early 2000s as
online content became bound to the RTUK law (2002), which regulated
broadcasting in Turkey. Prior to this, various websites in Turkey had
been blocked due to their critical content. The Telecommunications
Communication Presidency (TIB), which still continues to be responsible
for the regulation and control of online content, was founded in 2005.

The first law in Turkey that focused directly on the regulation of
online content – Law No. 5651 on the Regulation of Publications on the
Internet and Suppression of Crimes Committed by means of Such
Publications (“Law No. 5651”) – was passed in 2007. This law originally
was drafted to define and regulate cybercrime. However, the enacted law
had an expanded scope, and included vague statements that pave the way
for arbitrary political censorship of media content as noted in the
previous section. For example, article 8 defined “\[encouraging\]
suicide, sexual abuse of children, facilitating the usage of drugs and
stimulants, provision of materials being dangerous for the health,
vulgarity, prostitution, providing area and opportunity for gambling,
crimes indicated in the Law about the Crimes Committed Against
Atatürk”[^11BozdagTurkey_4] as crimes. Accordingly, entire websites could be banned for
allegedly violating the principles and reforms of Atatürk – as was the
case with the first blocking of YouTube in 2007 – or for making alleged
threats to Turkey’s independence. Given the vague wording of the law,
almost anything critical can be considered as a violation of Atatürk’s
reforms or as a threat to Turkey’s independence. This problematic
article of the law was also taken to the European Human Rights Court in
2012, which found the law incompatible with article 10 of the European
Convention on Human Rights.[^11BozdagTurkey_5]

In 2011 the government attempted to introduce a new law that would make
internet filtering mandatory for all users in Turkey. The draft law
provoked a passionate reaction, mobilizing not only activists and NGOs
but also regular users of the internet, who are not necessarily
politically active. Large protests were organized under the slogan
“Don’t touch my internet”. Over half a million people participated in
the campaign, which included both online and offline activism. This was
one of the most successful internet freedom campaigns in Turkey to date,
and it forced the government to change the draft law. The use of filters
became voluntary, not mandatory.

Another controversial change in Turkish internet law took place in 2014,
when Law No. 5651 was changed to enable URL-based blocking of websites.
Fines for crimes defined in this law also increased.[^11BozdagTurkey_6] Furthermore,
the new law authorized TIB and the Ministry of Transport, Maritime
Affairs and Communication to block websites within 24 hours after a
takedown request – without a court order.[^11BozdagTurkey_7] The law was passed in
February 2014, however, the article giving the Ministry the right to
block websites was found to be unconstitutional and was removed. Yet,
another omnibus bill that was passed in the beginning of 2015 that put
this article back on the table, and this time it was passed by the
parliament.

The amended Law No. 5651 contained a new article about the protection of
personal rights and privacy of individuals, but once again these terms
are vaguely defined. This leaves the TIB, the Ministry and the courts
with a lot of flexibility as to what can be considered a violation.
According to the new law, individuals can directly apply to the TIB,
which can decide to block websites as a precaution before a court order
has been granted. These extrajudicial blocks have been criticized as
unlawful, since TIB and the Ministry might block websites without a
court order for quite long periods.

These changes provoked a strong reaction on Twitter, Facebook and
Eksisozluk, a widely used dictionary-like user-generated website in
Turkey. However, not as many people participated as in the “Don’t touch
my internet” mobilization of 2011. One reason behind for this is the
fallout from the Gezi protests, which saw escalated police violence.
Another reason is that people were more interested in the local election
campaigns that also took place in March 2104.

In March 2014 – a month after this new law was passed, and shortly
before the local elections – Twitter was suddenly blocked again for two
weeks (20 March to 3 April). The purported reason for this was claims
about violations of personal rights and privacy of individuals, who
applied to TIB. Shortly after, YouTube was also blocked, this time for
more than two months (27 March to 29 May). The official explanation this
time was that the YouTube block was a response to a user uploading voice
recordings from a secret government meeting, in which officials
discussed a military intervention in Syria. The YouTube video containing
these voice recordings was said to reveal state secrets and as such was
considered a threat to the national security of Turkey. Once again, this
prompted massive reactions on Facebook, Twitter and Eksisozluk, with
people united around hashtags such as \#direntwitter (resist Twitter)
and \#direnyoutube (resist Youtube). This was a clear reference to the
Gezi protests, where the hashtag \#direngezi (resist Gezi) became a
symbol of the protest.

As was also the case in Gezi, people’s online protests were full of
irony and humour. This can be considered a form of “passive resistance”,
putting the legitimacy of government discourses about the need for site
blocks into question.[^11BozdagTurkey_8] This time, despite a strong reaction online,
there were only small street protests and almost no organized and
long-lasting campaign against the blocks. The online protests decreased
over time, although some activist groups and politicians continued to
speak about the matter.

The most common form of internet resistance in Turkey is the use of
software tools to access blocked websites. Until 2014, most users
preferred alternative and free DNS providers outside of Turkey, such as
Google DNS and OpenDNS*.* Countless websites provided advice on how to
change DNS settings to get around the government blocks, and users
quickly became familiar with these tactics. This increased again after
YouTube and Twitter were blocked in March 2014, as people searched
online for information about changing DNS settings. This can be seen in
Table 1 below, which shows the use of the words DNS, VPN and *sansür*
(censorship) on Twitter during the first days of the blocks in Turkey.

![Figure 2: During the March 2014 Twitter ban, a global search of tweets
shows that ‘VPN’ and ‘DNS’ as well the Turkish word for censorship were
both prominent terms.](imgs/BozdagImage1.png)
*Figure 2: During the March 2014 Twitter ban, a global search of tweets
shows that ‘VPN’ and ‘DNS’ as well the Turkish word for censorship were
both prominent terms.*

On the second day of the Twitter ban in March 2014, access to commonly
used DNS providers was also blocked from within Turkey. This was a
turning point for Turkish internet users, and many of them became aware
of VPN services for the first time. As can be seen in the Twitter
statistics above, the word VPN suddenly entered into online
conversation. During this period two popular free VPN services, Hotspot
Shield and TunnelBear, removed the usual download limits for their
Turkish customers, to support their circumvention practices against
censorship. These apps were downloaded by hundreds of thousands of
people in a couple of hours after the Twitter ban. Other VPN services
such as Zenmate or VPNTraffic also became very popular within a short
period of time. The popularity of VPN services for circumvention
practices of Turkish audiences can be seen plainly in the marketing
strategies of services like Torguard, which promotes its product to
Turkish users as a tool to “unblock Twitter”. Another tool used for
circumvention was the Tor browser. It appears that the combined effect
of these tools was successful overall, since the number of Tweets in
Turkish did not decrease but actually increased during the first days of
the 2014 Twitter ban.

Within a few weeks both Twitter and Youtube were unblocked following a
decision by Turkey’s constitutional court. The lawyers Yaman Akdeniz and
Kerem Altıparmak – internet freedom campaigners and NGO activists – had
petitioned the court on the basis that banning websites was a violation
of the right to freedom of expression. The constitutional court decided
in their favor and ordered the blocks to be lifted. Although this
decision can be seen as a positive step, many other websites are still
blocked in Turkey; in fact, the total number of blocked websites is
increasing. For example, in the aftermath of the June 2015 general
elections, when the ceasefire between the PKK and the Turkish state was
violated, critical websites such as Sendika, ÖzgürGündem and DagMedya
were blocked for being pro-PKK.

Unfortunately, there is no transparency about which websites are
currently being blocked. However, activist groups are working to compile
public lists of these blocked websites. One example is the anonymous
collective behind the Engelli Web (“Blocked Web”) project. According to
their research, the most commonly blocked category of websites contain
“obscene” content. These are not only pornographic websites, but for
example also websites that contain any sort of nudity or homosexual
content. Among these websites there is an increasing number of video and
video series sites. Then there are the sites blocked for political
reasons – for example, pro-Kurdish websites such as Fırat News or Yeni
Özgür Politika According to Engelli Web*,* more than 80,000 websites are
blocked as of May 2015.[^11BozdagTurkey_9]

Other activist groups in Turkey, such as Alternatif Bilisim Dernegi, the
Pirate Party (Korsan Parti) and Internet Derneği (Inetd), focus on ICTs
and internet freedom. These groups actively campaigns against internet
censorship, mount legal challenges, and organize events to raise
awareness. While marginal to national politics, they are increasingly
popular among young people.

Prosecution of individual internet users for posting material in online
forums has increased in recent years. These cases are again based on
definitions of crime that refer to “defamation of religion”, “violation
of personal rights” and so on. Some of these cases are legitimate, but
many of them seem to be simply attempts to silence anti-government
voices. Although website blocks have little effect in terms of
curtailing online expression (since people can always get around these
blocks), the threat of court cases and imprisonment may be more
effective in silencing dissent.

## Conclusion: Circumvention as a Solution to Internet Censorship? 

As the preceding discussion shows, over the last decade circumvention
activity and online rights discourses have become widespread in Turkey.
While some of this activity is entertainment-related, the main driver of
circumvention is not the geoblocked commercial video streaming services
but the country’s internet censorship system.

Of course, people can always circumvent these IP-based blocks by using
alternative DNS settings or VPN services. Blocking has been ineffective
in reducing traffic to banned sites, and may even increase it. In this
sense the blocking of the websites remains a rather symbolic act on the
part of the government. First and foremost, it is a tool for
intimidation and delegitimization. Combined with court cases against
individuals on the basis of their posts online, these have long-term
effects as people start to self-censor their online communication.
Second, these blocks are a demonstration of power to the AKP’s own
voters. As Twitter was blocked shortly before the local elections in
March 2014, Erdogan made this part of his political campaign by saying
that “they (AKP) were going to root out Twitter”, thus signaling his
power to take on a global internet actor. Third, through website
blocking the government is forcing big internet companies like Twitter
to be more cooperative in terms of removing content. Twitter
representatives visited TIB a couple of times after the ban in 2014,
however the content of the meetings was never made public. Many Tweets
and Twitter accounts have been removed since then at the request of the
TIB. Again these blocked accounts and tweets are not made public by
Twitter.

Even the government is aware of the fact that they cannot completely ban
websites. Erdogan himself argued that everybody, including himself, can
access YouTube during the ban in 2009. Many state officials continued to
use Twitter during the 2014 ban. Yet, this picture might change since
there are also attempts to increase the level of control on both a legal
and technological level. As we have seen, new laws are making it easier
to block websites without a court order, and the government is investing
in more sophisticated blocking technologies.

As the government extends internet regulation, people are looking for
new technological workarounds. This was evident in March 2014, when the
most used alternative DNS providers could not be used and people moved
to alternative VPN services. These tools enable Turkish internet users
to individually cope with internet censorship through circumvention, but
not necessarily to fight it. Given the fast-changing political
environment in Turkey, the issue of internet censorship seems to only
gain priority when bigger websites such as Twitter and YouTube are being
blocked. However, internet censorship in Turkey is an ongoing issue.
Campaigns like “Don’t touch my internet” in 2011 showed the power of a
well-organized protest, in which different actors from across the
political spectrum come together. In the face of increasing government
control, organizing well-networked, sustainable and effective action
against internet censorship seems more important than ever in Turkey.

## References

Akdeniz, Yaman and Kerem Altıparmak. ‘AİHM Kararı: 5651 Sayılı Yasa
AİHS'e Aykırı’, *Bianet*, 19 December 2012,
[http://bianet.org/bianet/ifade-ozgurlugu/142923-aihm-karari-5651-sayili-yasa-aihs-e-aykiri](http://bianet.org/bianet/ifade-ozgurlugu/142923-aihm-karari-5651-sayili-yasa-aihs-e-aykiri).

Boston Consulting Group. Türkiye’de Internet Ekonomisi Raporu, 2013,
[http://www.turkiye-e-konomi.com/Turkey-Online-Turkish.pdf](http://www.turkiye-e-konomi.com/Turkey-Online-Turkish.pdf).

Manav, Volkan. ‘Türkiye’den Netflix Izlemek Mümkün Olabilir mi?',
*Teknoloji Oku,* 12 February 2015,
[http://www.teknolojioku.com/haber/turkiyeden-netflix-izlemek-mumkun-olabilir-mi-26053.html](http://www.teknolojioku.com/haber/turkiyeden-netflix-izlemek-mumkun-olabilir-mi-26053.html).

Terkan, Banu and Nurullah Terkan. ‘Analysis of the Political Discourses
of the Ruling and Opposition Parties Regarding the New Regulations in
the Internet Law in Turkey’, Proceedings of the 13th International
Academic Conference, Antibes, 2014.

TUİK. 22 August 2014,
[http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=16198](http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=16198).

Yalkın, Çağrı, Finola Kerrigan and Dirk vom Lehn. ‘Legitimisation of the
Role of the Nation State: Understanding of and Reactions to Internet
Censorship in Turkey’, *New Media and Society* 16 (2014): 271-288.

Yaman Akdeniz and Kerem Altıparmak. ‘5651 sayılı Kanunun Değişiklik
Tasarısının Getirdiği Değişiklikler Üzerine Bir Değerlendirme’, online
report, *Cyber Rights,* 2014,
[http://cyber-rights.org.tr/docs/5651\_Tasari\_Rapor.pdf](http://cyber-rights.org.tr/docs/5651\_Tasari\_Rapor.pdf).

[^11BozdagTurkey_1]: TUİK, 22 August 2014,
    [http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=16198](http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=16198).

[^11BozdagTurkey_2]: TUİK, 22 August 2014,
    [http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=16198](http://www.turkstat.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=16198).

[^11BozdagTurkey_3]: Boston Consulting Group, Türkiye’de Internet Ekonomisi Raporu,
    2013, p. 5.

[^11BozdagTurkey_4]: Banu Terkan and Nurullah Terkan, ‘Analysis of the Political
    Discourses of the Ruling and Opposition Parties Regarding the New
    Regulations in the Internet Law in Turkey’, Proceedings of the 13th
    International Academic Conference, Antibes, 2014, p. 552.

[^11BozdagTurkey_5]: Yaman Akdeniz and Kerem Altıparmak, ‘AİHM Kararı: 5651 Sayılı Yasa
    AİHS'e Aykırı’, Bianet, 19 December 2012,
    [http://bianet.org/bianet/ifade-ozgurlugu/142923-aihm-karari-5651-sayili-yasa-aihs-e-aykiri](http://bianet.org/bianet/ifade-ozgurlugu/142923-aihm-karari-5651-sayili-yasa-aihs-e-aykiri).

[^11BozdagTurkey_6]: Yaman Akdeniz and Kerem Altıparmak, ‘5651 sayılı Kanunun
    Değişiklik Tasarısının Getirdiği Değişiklikler Üzerine Bir
    Değerlendirme’, *Cyber Rights*, 2014, p. 14,
    [http://cyber-rights.org.tr/docs/5651\_Tasari\_Rapor.pdf]( http://cyber-rights.org.tr/docs/5651\_Tasari\_Rapor.pdf).

[^11BozdagTurkey_7]: Yaman Akdeniz and Kerem Altıparmak, ‘5651 sayılı Kanunun
    Değişiklik Tasarısının Getirdiği Değişiklikler Üzerine Bir
    Değerlendirme’, *Cyber Rights*, 2014, p.14,
    [http://cyber-rights.org.tr/docs/5651\_Tasari\_Rapor.pdf](http://cyber-rights.org.tr/docs/5651\_Tasari\_Rapor.pdf).

[^11BozdagTurkey_8]: Çağrı Yalkın, Finola Kerrigan and Dirk vom Lehn, ‘Legitimisation
    of the Role of the Nation State: Understanding of and Reactions to
    Internet Censorship in Turkey’, *New Media and Society* 16 (2014):
    271.

[^11BozdagTurkey_9]: Engelli Web,
    [http://engelliweb.com/istatistikler/numbering.xml](http://engelliweb.com/istatistikler/numbering.xml).
