---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# **Cuba: *Videos to the left –* circumvention practices and audiovisual ecologies **

**Fidel A. Rodriguez**

**DATA BOX**

30%: Proportion of Cubans aged 16-54 who have access to the Internet

\$2: Hourly cost for a 100 Mbit/s fiber connection in CUC/USD

0%: Proportion of internet users who made online purchases in 2014 from
Cuban accounts

0%: Proportion of internet users who paid for a video streaming service
in 2014 from Cuban accounts

**QUOTES**

“Starting today, people in Cuba with Internet connections and access to
international payment methods will be able to subscribe to Netflix and
instantly watch a curated selection of popular movies and TV shows.” –
Netflix press release, 9 February 2015

Havana, January 2015. A young reggaeton singer is detained by the police
in a luxurious house on the outskirts of the city. The arrest is quickly
reported in foreign news media outlets, with Reuters first breaking the
story. These reports describe a pending court case in Florida, involving
alleged major fraud of the U.S. Medicare health program. Photos of the
singer’s extravagant lifestyle are published in the media, where he
poses with bundles of cash and firearms.

The singer’s arrest is captured by bystanders and neighbors on mobile
phones. While there is no coverage of the arrest in the Cuban media,
amateur videos soon begin to circulate via unregulated wifi networks
that operate across Havana. A few days later, another video appears on
YouTube, this time recorded by a motorcyclist who was driving by the
scene of the arrest. In the following weeks, a recording of the singer’s
police interview also starts to circulate across the city, passed around
through USB drives. Finally, these materials make their way into
commercial pirate distribution, appearing as a folder in *el paquete*
(‘the package’) – a regularly updated compilation of pirated video and
music files that is circulated across Cuba through thousands of local
redistributors.

The story of Gilbert Man, the stage name of the artist in question,
reveals how video circulates informally in Cuba today. Geoblocking is
not a major issue for Cubans – slow internet connections make video
streaming almost impossible, and access is mostly limited to government
offices and institutions – but circumvention is a mainstream, everyday
practice. Recent years have seen the emergence, *a la izquierda* (‘to
the left’), of a surprising ecology of transnational video circulation
practices making use of diverse technological workarounds. These
processes draw attention to the transformation of media access in the
country, in the context of an expanding but still limited internet
infrastructure. They also reflect the distinctive media geography of
Cuba, which partakes in global flows of digital video content, but in a
unique way that combines networked and offline distribution systems.

The term ‘to the left’ does not refer to a party-political position in
Cuban everyday speech. Ironically, it refers to all types of non-formal
methods to access goods or services. This phrase has become popular
since the 1990s, referring to the economic struggle of ordinary people.
It evokes the Cuban style of proxy access to all sites, through all
connections.

## Skipping back: revolution, videos and access

Universal access to culture has been a foundational ideal of the Cuban
revolutionary project since 1959. As part of the political demands of
the new era,[^16RodriguezCuba_1] cinema production became a priority for the government,
and a national institute dedicated to cinema – the Instituto Cubano del
Arte y la Industria Cinematográficos – was founded in April 1959. In
practice, this vision was undermined by the economic and political
ruptures of the Cold War. During the 1960s, Cuban policymakers approved
the use of unlicensed cultural materials – including foreign copyrighted
materials such as movies and books – as they were seen to be valuable
for the cultural development of the nation. However, this universal
vision of access coexists with state regulation of culture and media,
according to the political programme of the Communist Party. This policy
limits access to audiovisual content to officially sanctioned government
spaces and facilities.

In response, a massive, extra-legal culture of media circulation has
emerged. Officially banned movies are widely available, leading to much
public debate about censorship. State-run TV channels screen pirated HBO
programming on a daily basis. Despite the increasing cost of living,
TVs, DVD players and digital devices for recording and playback can be
purchased privately and are no longer distributed by the state. The
acquisition and use of this equipment has become an important status
symbol for Cuban families.[^16RodriguezCuba_2]

Until 2007, the sale of VHS or CD/DVD equipment was illegal.
Nonetheless, private video rental outlets proliferated across the
country. Despite their illegal status they were generally tolerated by
the authorities. For the first time, these practices put private
citizens and household businesses in a social environment of audiovisual
consumption, and relocated media consumption to private spaces.[^16RodriguezCuba_3]

In the pre-digital period, a small official VHS movie rental and sales
circuit existed in Cuba, but prices were prohibitively expensive for
most people. Hotels and shopping centers stocked a small selection of
prestige Cuban movies on VHS, with pricing aimed at the tourist market.
Another program in the early 2000s established movie rental facilities
in some theaters, featuring a catalog of quality titles, but lacking of
the variety of the private video stores. Aside from a few other
small-scale initiatives, these are the only authorized systems of home
video distribution organized by the Cuban government. The few
video-streaming repositories managed by state institutions include only
a small selection of titles, and do not carry the more popular Cuban
productions.

In 2013, a landmark reform of economic regulation in Cuba allowed
private sale of pirate CDs and DVDs in the streets, and specified the
kinds of tax that such enterprises would pay. In the case of Cuban media
the regulations permit public screening for noncommercial purposes and
with the recognition of the authors. This system of sanctioned
small-scale distribution continues today. It is a matter of some
controversy, however, because some artists regard the system as
tantamount to official sanctioning of piracy At the same time, “the
pirate” does not exist as a criminal figure in Cuba.[^16RodriguezCuba_4]

There have been other changes in Cuban media policy along the way. For
example, in 2013 a new ruling led to the mass closure of private 3D
cinemas, which had become popular in recent years – however two years
later the government announced that some state-owned 3D cinemas would
reopen across the country.

Another important practice is the acquisition of cable TV receivers,
which are still illegal for Cuban citizens to own. This informal cable
TV system in Cuba requires the installation of a modified receiver
acquired on the black market, and operated on a sublease basis. Wiring
is run through the roof and attached to the telephone wiring in areas
near the signal receiver. These channel packages usually include
American TV programming aimed at the Cuban community of emigrants in
Miami. In 2007 and 2009, various investigations confirmed access to
these services as a common cultural practice among families in different
neighborhoods of Havana.[^16RodriguezCuba_5]

Even when media devices like computers and HDD players are not available
through shops, they can be acquired on the black market. Official
statistics from 2014 suggest a very small percentage of private
ownership of these items,[^16RodriguezCuba_6] but the real figures are likely higher.

Since the 1980s the government has been involved in community ICT
programmes, and these have also been instrumental in the daily
experience of media and internet use in Cuba. One initiative, known as
the Youth Computing Club, offers free or low-cost access to computers
along with training in computer skills. These clubs are joined together
in a national network that offers blogs and social networking sites,
which also connects to other national internal networks linked to the
educational and health sectors. Through membership of these networks,
some Cubans are able to get online regularly – one example is the
Infomed network of health workers who acquired free access to the
internet in September 2015. This opening-up of internet access
represents an important increase in the number of home connections.
However, access is restricted to 25 hours a month, on a very low-speed
connection. While networks such as these are limited by the
infrastructure they use and the legal framework governing them, these
home internet networks could nonetheless play a major role in the
development of a nation-wide content-sharing platform.

## Internet dilemmas

Cuba has been connected to the internet by satellite since 1996, through
a special license from the United States Department of Commerce, as an
exception to the laws forbidding economic relations with the island. In
2012 – before the first optical fiber cable connection was established
with Venezuela – Cuba’s connectivity rate was 458 Mbs input/229 Mbs
output,[^16RodriguezCuba_7] comparable to that of an apartment building in the United
States. In light of the lack of available bandwidth and infrastructure
the government’s official internet policy was to prioritise connectivity
to government institutions and select user groups.[^16RodriguezCuba_8] Hence the Cuban
internet came to be officially understood as a repository of
information, tools for electronic commerce and a means for information
dissemination.[^16RodriguezCuba_9] This approach to internet regulation was also shaped
by the conflict with the United States, which has long funded projects
involving ICTs as tools of political subversion to undermine the Cuban
government.[^16RodriguezCuba_10]

Personal use of social networking sites at government institutions was
usually restricted or limited to low-traffic times. As a result, the
practical knowledge of forms of proxy access to these sites became a
shared secret. Nonetheless, for almost all Cubans the very slow internet
speeds made social networking impossible until the wifi zones appeared
in 2015 (see below).

In 2012, the state-owned telecommunications company ETECSA implemented
the first open internet access service. Costing 4.50CUC per hour
(US\$5.10), the service was available at workstations in municipal
offices, after registration of personal data. The price was extremely
high, and even providers considered it excessive.[^16RodriguezCuba_11] As a result, this
initiative received much criticism. However, the Cuban First Vice
President said in a national convention on ICTs and cybersecurity in
January 2015 that the state was willing to extend open internet access
across the country. This was followed by the announcement of a plan to
connect all schools in Cuba and improve the internet infrastructure of
universities, where limited access was already available. In July,
ETECSA started a wireless internet service in 35 public spaces around
Cuba at a price of 2CUC per hour.

This rate is still considered high, but has resulted in a substantial
increase in use. According to the National Statistics Office, in 2014
there were 3 million internet users, representing 27 percent of the
total population.[^16RodriguezCuba_12] Nonetheless, Cuba still comes in at 160^th^ place
on the International Telecommunication Union’s ranking of global ICT use
and access. These facts, combined with the country’s history of informal
interchange and non-market cultural consumption, help to explain the
diversity and complexity of video circulation practice in present-day
Cuba, which interface with global networks but use primarily *offline*
distribution methods within Cuba.

## Videos without time or space: ‘the package’

  --
  --

In parallel to these structural constraints on internet access, various
workarounds have emerged in Cuba. One well-documented phenomenon is USB
sharing, which since the mid-2000s has become an efficient system for
digital media circulation in Cuba.[^16RodriguezCuba_13] Over time this form of
distribution has become standardized in a commercial format known as *el
paquete* (the package). These compilations comprise one terabyte of
diverse media content – television, movies, software, magazines and
music – all updated on a weekly basis. The *paquete* typically includes:
the latest episodes of TV shows direct from the United States, Spain,
Mexico, Brazil, and Colombia; a selection of new documentaries; Cuban
television shows; the latest music videos; and multiple TV programs from
Miami. According to one study, 35% of the Havana population (almost 3
million people) are regular consumers of *el paquete* – although a lot
of people access it through friends for free.[^16RodriguezCuba_14] The mysterious origin
of the weekly *paquete* is a source of collective obsession in Cuba,
because until 2015 there were very few places that had the bandwidth to
download such a large amount of data. Nonetheless, different researchers
have confirmed that content in the *paquete* comes from has diverse
sources, from cable antennas to p2p download sites[^16RodriguezCuba_15].

The price of the *paquete* is variable, depending on where you live and
what day of the week you buy it.[^16RodriguezCuba_16] The content selection within each
weekly *paquete* is also variable, because distributors are known to add
and remove videos as the *paquete* moves through the network, from the
original compilers through to the high-level brokers (“first hands”,
“big fishes”) and ultimately to street-level retail and rental sites. At
each level, distributors – mostly part-time or temporary workers who
have become involved in the *paquete* business to make some money on the
side – may add or remove content to suit local tastes, meaning that the
product is rebuilt at each stage. Although some *paquete* distributors
have implemented feedback mechanisms to cater to their customers’
demand, user involvement in the selection of programming usually happens
only during the final stage of street-level distribution.[^16RodriguezCuba_17]

![](media/image1.png)

Fig. 1. An example of a *paquete*

Distribution of the *paquete* is typically carried out discreetly, often
through licensed streetside DVD vendors or private photocopying and
printing centres. These activities are widely tolerated by officials.
Several high-ranking government figures have publicly stated that they
do not intend to ban this trade. As a result, the *paquete* trade is
widespread in the streets as well as on digital networks. For example,
in the Cuban online marketplace Revolico.com – a Craigslist-style
classifieds site for Cubans which, ironically, is accessible only
through proxies – dealers advertise their various offerings and freely
offer their mobile phone numbers. Interestingly, the contents of the
*paquete* often include scraped data from Revolico.com so that people
without internet access can browse its listings.

The social significance of this phenomenon has led to a broad public
debate on the topic, involving senior officials in Cuban cultural
policy. The level of media coverage is unprecedented for an informal
market activity. These discussions have drawn new attention to certain
aspects of the Cuban media environment: copyright legislation and its
implementation, national internet infrastructure, consumer education,
cultural policy, and the status of Cuban audiovisual production. Quality
of content and the protection of national culture are particularly
popular topics of debate. As a result, in 2015 the aforementioned Youth
Computing Club began to distribute (for free) a *paquete-*like
compilation created by government-linked cultural organizations,
offering a selection of pirated ‘quality’ content, including movies and
TV series.

![](media/image2.jpeg)

Fig. 2. A private photocopying and printing business in Havana openly
advertises pirated videos. Photo: Fidel A. Rodriguez

The spread of *paquete* distribution has also led to the development of
an advertising market, including unregistered advertising agencies.
Digital publications generated exclusively for the *paquete* have
multiplied. These publications cover topics underserved by the official
Cuban press, including fashion and celebrity culture. Likewise, the
*paquete* has also become a distribution space for locally-developed
mobile apps. Even on state television broadcasts, the unique watermarks
of certain *paquete* distributors can often be made out, revealing the
origin of some of this content.

## Informal wireless networks 

Another popular means of video distribution in Cuba is through urban
wifi networks. Concentrated in Havana, but also found in other parts of
the country, these illegal networks are organized by communities of
video game players. While none of these networks are connected to the
internet, they nonetheless have their own forums, social network sites,
massive voice chats, streaming stations, and FTP servers for downloading
pirated video. It is impossible to determine the number of users with
any precision, but the number of users is large and growing. In early
2015, one of the network’s main sites had about 20,000 registered
profiles. Complex forms of identity management and collective
decision-making have evolved to regulate these networks.[^16RodriguezCuba_18]

In these wifi communities, FTP content sharing is one of the most
popular activities. Movies can be transmitted between different users in
seconds. The weekly *paquete* is often available for download, thanks to
an agreement with (and agreed payment to) the distributors. Some forms
of local user-generated content are also available, including machinima,
parody videos, flash mobs and remixes. FTP sharing etiquette is
informally regulated, and has become a source of controversy within the
community. Inappropriate downloading behavior can lead to a user being
temporarily ‘banned’ through IP address blocking.

![](media/image3.png)

Fig. 3. A *Game of Thrones* file transfer on an informal wireless
network

The network is also used to check the scores of European football league
matches. While the Cuban TV networks regularly broadcast live Bundesliga
matches, along with some other leagues, a number of very popular teams
can only be viewed in delayed broadcast. As a workaround, certain users
of the wifi networks (those with internet or satellite TV access) upload
short videos and game highlights from the broadcast, captured with their
cell phones aimed at the TV screen.

Because of its illegal nature, this infrastructure is hidden. To keep a
low profile, the community forbids commercial activities on the network.
Internet-access sharing is also forbidden, along with political or
religious debate. Except for some cases of commercial trading of
internet access, the Cuban authorities have tolerated the existence of
these networks. It is understood that the police have even offered
protection when network hardware has been stolen (a common occurrence).
Informal networks such as these are still illegal under Cuban law, but a
range of evidence – including leaked documents, public statements by
officials, and similar experiments by state authorities – suggest that
this kind of network may have a place within official ICT and internet
policy in Cuba.

## Transnational ways to see: video and the diaspora

With a large community of Cuban immigrants in the United States, Canada,
Latin America and Europe, transnational articulation of family ties is
one of the most important social dynamics in the daily life of Cubans.
Given the high cost of telephone calls and restricted internet access,
communicating with family abroad can be a challenge. In 2015, a call to
the United States cost about 88 cents a minute. In response, there is a
longstanding tradition of asynchronous video exchange with the family
through video letters and YouTube video uploads.[^16RodriguezCuba_19]

It is therefore not surprising that Cubans are experimenting with online
chat, using the aforementioned urban wifi networks as a means of access.
Aside from Facebook video chat, the most widely used is the Chinese tool
IMO for its low bandwidth requirements and high speed. Today,
wifi-connected public spaces in Havana are full of people video chatting
with family abroad (even though these users would probably prefer a more
private environment). Software tools like IMO are usually shared among
users through another popular Bluetooth application, Zapya, which is
also frequently used for organized file-sharing meet-ups in parks and
public spaces. In contrast, Skype is difficult to use in Cuba, as it is
blocked to preserve the monopoly of the national telephone company.
Those Cubans who do use Skype typically do so through VPN subscriptions
maintained by friends and family outside Cuba.

Family ties are also strengthened through transnational consumption of
Cuban music and culture. From Youtube to VOD sites, the proliferation of
online streaming spaces provides access to Cuban-produced content for
audiences outside Cuba. This system of video sharing is a response to
the lack of an official streaming service for Cuban television, and the
limited understanding of audiences outside the country.

Despite the access challenges, these forms of transnational video
culture are increasingly widespread in Cuba. Video streaming is not
practiced in the same way as in other countries, but the Cuban digital
mediascape is nonetheless full of emergent forms of digital video
consumption and communication that make efficient use of limited
infrastructure.

![](media/image4.png)

Fig. 4. A VPN advertisement in Revolico.com

## The future

The diverse video practices described above are taking place in a
context of rapid political and economic transformation in Cuba,
particularly with regards to communication. For example, Netflix’s
announcement in 2015 that it would soon open its services to Cuban
customers – even before it was available in major markets like Spain –
crystalized some of the new scenarios associated with the normalization
of diplomatic relations with the United States. But it also exposed the
contradictions of digital culture in Cuba. Even though no Cubans could
realistically access Netflix, due to the lack of credit cards and
high-speed internet access, they were nonetheless already able to view
all the latest *House of Cards* episodes through the multiple
circulation methods described above.

Within these transformations, copyright will become increasingly
important as a cultural policy issue. Interestingly, copyright
enforcement in Cuba seems to have faded as a priority for the United
States, as evidenced by the country’s disappearance from the Special 301
list of most-infringing nations. At the same time, Cuban producers of
media and commodity goods, such as tobacco and rum, have become more
interested in actively exploiting their trademarks overseas. In
September 2015 the major record label in Cuba, EGREEM, signed an
agreement with Sony Music giving them global distribution rights to the
entire EGREEM catalogue – the most important in the country. These
developments reflect a changing attitude to copyright in Cuba. They may
also entail new restrictions in the digital distribution of Cuban
content, such as the many unauthorized YouTube uploads of Cuban
recording artists which may now be subject to takedown requests by Sony.

While restricted internet access is a fact of life in Cuba, diverse
circulatory practices provide effective workarounds for these blockages.
The cultural consequences of this informal infrastructure are
significant. Looking ahead, we may start to see a different kind of
Cuban communication policy emerging, one that transcends a focus on
containment and regulation, and instead uses the creative potential of
an open, networked culture of circulation. Cuba now has the opportunity
to pursue an alternative path of socioeconomic and cultural development,
in line with the revolutionary project, but not limited by copyright
trade guidelines or government restrictions.

## References

Abad, Karina. *La piratería en Cuba*, Law School, Guantánamo University,
2013, Cuba,
http://caribeña.eumed.net/wp-content/uploads/pirateria-cuba.pdf.

Barrera, Yanet. *La revuelta del espectador. Estudio exploratorio sobre
el consumo mediático alternativo*, MA Thesis, Havana University, Cuba,
2009.

Cabrera, Cinthya. *Rutas USB. Acercamiento a la gestión de contenidos
audiovisuales en el formato Paquete que realizan actores no
institucionales en redes informales en La Habana,* Bachelor Thesis,
Havana University, Cuba, 2015.

Calzadilla, Carlos Marcos. *Contar la Isla en videos. Un acercamiento a
los rasgos que caracterizan el discurso sobre familias transnacionales
cubanas a través de videos de usuarios no profesionales en YouTube*,
Bachelor Thesis, Havana University. Cuba¸ 2014.

Castañeda, Dayne and Daynet Fonseca, *Teleadictos: conquistando la TV
por la izquierda. Aproximación a la construcción de sentidos a partir
del consumo mediático informal de programas audiovisuales en el
asentamiento precario San Pablo en Santiago de Cuba,* Bachelor Thesis,
East University, Cuba. 2014.

Concepción, José Raúl. *La cultura empaquetada: Análisis del consumo
audiovisual informal del Paquete semanal en un grupo de jóvenes
capitalinos*, Bachelor Thesis, Havana University, Cuba, 2015.

Díaz, Elaine and Firuzeh Sokooh, ‘Internet y las TIC en Cuba: Notas Para
un Debate Sobre Políticas Públicas, *Temas*, La Habana, 2013,
www.temas.cult.cu/revistas/74/08%20elaine.pdf.

Echemendía, Isabel, *Copi@ y Comp@rte una vez a la semana. Acercamiento
a los principales rasgos que caracterizan el consumo audiovisual
informal del Paquetes Semanal en dos grupos de jóvenes de la capital de
Mayabeque*, Bachelor Thesis, Havana University, Cuba, 2015.

González, Félix*. Usos de los videojuegos en redes inalámbricas
informales en La Habana*, Bachelor Thesis, Havana University, Cuba,
2015.

International Telecommunication Union. ‘Measuring the Information
Society Report’, Geneva, Switzerland 2014,
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/publications/mis2014/MIS2014\_without\_Annex\_4.pdf.

Linares, Cecilia et al. *El consumo cultural y sus prácticas en Cuba*,
Cuban Institute of Cultural Investigation Juan Marinello, La Habana,
Cuba, 2009.

Márquez, Vanessa. ‘El consumo del Paquete Semanal en La Habana’, Social
Research Center, Instituto Cubano de Radio y Televisión, unpublished
version, 2015.

Moloney, Patricia. ‘Promoting Global Internet Freedom: Policy and
Technology’, Congressional Research Service, 2013,
https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R41837.pdf.

National Statistics Office. ‘Tecnologías de Información y las
Comunicaciones: Indicadores Seleccionados’, 2015,
http://www.one.cu/ticis2014.htm.

Pertierra, Anna Cristina. ‘Private Pleasures: Watching Videos in
Post-Soviet Cuba’, *International Journal of Cultural Studies* 12.2
(2009): 113-130.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. *Cuba: The Struggle for Consumption*, Coconut Creek, FL:
Caribbean Studies Press, 2011.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. ‘If They Show “Prison Break” in the United States on a
Wednesday, by Thursday It Is Here: Mobile Media Networks in Twenty-First
Century in Cuba’*,* *Television and New Media* 13.5 (2012): 399–414.

Recio, Milena. ‘La hora de los desconectados. Evaluación del diseño de
la política de “acceso social” a Internet en Cuba en un contexto de
cambios*.*’ *Bimestre Cubana* 116.4 (2014),
http://www.bimestrecubana.cult.cu/ojs/index.php/revistabimestre/article/viewArticle/177.

Toirac, Yanet. *Política cultural:* *Una propuesta de enfoque
comunicológico para su estudio*, PhD diss., Havana University, Cuba,
2009.

[^16RodriguezCuba_1]: Yanet Toirac, *Política cultural:* *Una propuesta de enfoque
    comunicológico para su estudio*, PhD diss., Havana University, Cuba,
    2009.

[^16RodriguezCuba_2]: Anna Cristina Pertierra, *Cuba. The Struggle for Consumption*,
    Coconut Creek, FL: Caribbean Studies Press, 2011.

[^16RodriguezCuba_3]: Anna Cristina Pertierra*,* ‘Private pleasures: Watching videos in
    Post-Soviet Cuba’, *International Journal of Cultural Studies* 12.2
    (2009): 113-130.

[^16RodriguezCuba_4]: Karina Abad, *La piratería en Cuba*, Law School, Guantánamo
    University, 2013, Cuba,

    http://caribeña.eumed.net/wp-content/uploads/pirateria-cuba.pdf.

[^16RodriguezCuba_5]: Yanet Barrera, *La revuelta del espectador: Estudio exploratorio
    sobre el consumo mediático alternativo*, MA Thesis, Havana
    University, Cuba, 2009.

[^16RodriguezCuba_6]: National Statistics Office, *Tecnologías de información y las
    comunicaciones: Indicadores seleccionados*, 2015,
    http://www.one.cu/ticis2014.htm.

[^16RodriguezCuba_7]: Milena Recio, ‘La hora de los desconectados. Evaluación del diseño
    de la política de “acceso social” a Internet en Cuba en un contexto
    de cambios’, *Bimestre Cubana* 116.41 (2014),
    http://www.bimestrecubana.cult.cu/ojs/index.php/revistabimestre/article/viewArticle/177.

[^16RodriguezCuba_8]: Milena Recio, ‘La hora de los desconectados’*.*

[^16RodriguezCuba_9]: Elaine Díaz and Firuzeh Sokooh, ‘Internet y las TIC en Cuba: Notas
    para un debate sobre políticas públicas’, *Temas* 2013,
    www.temas.cult.cu/revistas/74/08%20elaine.pdf.

[^16RodriguezCuba_10]: Patricia Moloney, ‘Promoting Global Internet Freedom: Policy and
    Technology’, Congressional Research Service, 2013,
    https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R41837.pdf.

[^16RodriguezCuba_11]: Milena Recio, ‘La hora de los desconectados’.

[^16RodriguezCuba_12]: National Statistics Office, ‘Tecnologías de información y las
    comunicaciones’.

[^16RodriguezCuba_13]: This has been documented by a number of researchers. See: Yanet
    Barrera, Yanet *La revuelta del espectador. Estudio exploratorio
    sobre el consumo mediático alternativo*, MA Thesis, Havana
    University, Cuba, 2009; Cecilia Linares et al., *El consumo cultural
    y sus prácticas en Cuba*, Cuban Institute of Cultural Investigation
    Juan Marinello, La Habana, Cuba, 2009; Anna Cristina Pertierra, ‘If
    They Show “Prison Break” in the United States on a Wednesday, by
    Thursday it is Here: Mobile Media Networks in Twenty-First Century
    in Cuba’*,* *Television and New Media* 13.5 (2012): 399–414; Dayne
    Castañeda and Daynet Fonseca, *Teleadictos: Conquistando la TV por
    la izquierda. Aproximación a la construcción de sentidos a partir
    del consumo mediático informal de programas audiovisuales en el
    asentamiento precario San Pablo en Santiago de Cuba,* Bachelor
    Thesis, East University, Cuba, 2014; Cinthya Cabrera, *Rutas USB,
    Acercamiento a la gestión de contenidos audiovisuales en el formato
    Paquete que realizan actores no institucionales en redes informales
    en La Habana,* Bachelor Thesis, Havana University, Cuba, 2015; José
    Raúl Concepción, *La cultura empaquetada: Análisis del consumo
    audiovisual informal del Paquete semanal en un grupo de jóvenes
    capitalinos*, Bachelor Thesis, Havana University, Cuba, 2015; Isabel
    Echemendía, *Copi@ y Comp@rte una vez a la semana: Acercamiento a
    los principales rasgos que caracterizan el consumo audiovisual
    informal del Paquetes Semanal en dos grupos de jóvenes de la capital
    de Mayabeque*, Bachelor Thesis, Havana University, Cuba, 2015;
    Vanessa Márquez, *El consumo del Paquete semanal en La Habana*,
    Social Research Center, Instituto Cubano de Radio y Televisión,
    2015.

[^16RodriguezCuba_14]: It is estimated that around 80% of users access the *paquete* for
    free, by sharing with friends and family. Vanessa Márquez, *El
    consumo del paquete*.

[^16RodriguezCuba_15]: José Raúl Concepción, *La cultura empaquetada.*

[^16RodriguezCuba_16]: Cinthya Cabrera, *Rutas USB.*

[^16RodriguezCuba_17]: Cinthya Cabrera, *Rutas USB.*

[^16RodriguezCuba_18]: Félix González, *Usos de los videojuegos en redes inalámbricas
    informales en La Habana*, Bachelor Thesis, Havana University, Cuba,
    2015.

[^16RodriguezCuba_19]: Carlos Marcos Calzadilla, *Contar la Isla en videos. Un
    acercamiento a los rasgos que caracterizan el discurso sobre
    familias transnacionales cubanas a través de videos de usuarios no
    profesionales en YouTube*, Bachelor Thesis, Havana University. Cuba¸
    2014.
