---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 18
Type (formerly called Item): book 
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 
Article-title: Geoblocking and Global Video Culture
Article-status: accepted
Author: Ramon Lobato, James Meese, Juan Llamas-Rodriguez, Cameran Ashraf, Marketa Trimble, Adam Rugg, Florian Hoof, Roland Burke, Jinying Li, Çiğdem Bozdağ, Chris Baumann, Aneta Podkalicka, Chris Baumann, Sandra Hanchard, Vanessa Mendes Moreira de Sa, Hadi Sohrabi, Fidel Alejandro Rodriguez, Evan Elkins.
Author-email: rlobato@swin.edu.au, James.Meese@uts.edu.au
Author-bio:
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
...


# The USA: Geoblocking in a Privileged Market

### Evan Elkins

STAT BOX:

36%: Percentage of American homes that subscribe to Netflix.[^17ElkinsUSA_1]

20,000: Number of VPN communications the NSA aimed to survey per hour in
2011, according to the Edward Snowden documents.[^17ElkinsUSA_2]

\$39.95: Cost for a yearly subscription to popular VPN service Private
Internet Access, in US\$.[^17ElkinsUSA_3]

22.6%: Percentage of North American Pirate Bay users who use a VPN
service, according to a 2013 survey.[^17ElkinsUSA_4]

PULL QUOTE

‘every now and then we feel the burn in the States, too.’ – *Lifehacker*
blogger Adam Pash, in 2010.

The hashtag \#NBCFail, which popped up regularly on social media in the
summer of 2012, represented yet another chapter in the long story of
American audiences’ irritation at the often shallow, shoddy character of
their national broadcast networks. This time, the target of viewers’ ire
was NBC’s coverage of that year’s Summer Olympics in London. Frustrated
with tape-delayed events and the network’s US-centric commentary, United
States viewers naturally sought out the BBC’s telecast as an
alternative. Savvy viewers who did their research may have stumbled upon
the BBC’s iPlayer platform. The iPlayer was livestreaming the BBC’s
coverage of the Olympics, and thus promised live, superior coverage and
an escape from NBC’s jingoistic slant. Upon navigating to that platform,
however, Americans found this message: ‘BBC iPlayer TV programmes are
available to play in the UK only’.

![Figure 1 An example of geoblocked content on BBC iPlayer](imgs/ElkinsGeoblocking1.png)
*Figure 1 An example of geoblocked content on BBC iPlayer*

In these moments, US residents confronted an experience of transnational
viewing with which many around the world were already familiar. Viewers
living in other countries understand geoblocking as a form of power
emanating from major media conglomerates, many of which are rooted in
Hollywood-based (yet globalized) cultural industries. As many of this
book’s other chapters make clear, geoblocking is just a part of the
everyday viewing experience for people around the globe – albeit an
often-frustrating one. Many of these experiences involve attempts at
accessing American programming through platforms like Hulu or the
American version of Netflix. But given that many of the platforms
usually targeted in global complaints about geoblocking are, in fact,
available in the US, what does geoblocking look like from *within* the
United States? And how and why do people circumvent it?

Geoblocking in the United States is generally invisible – until it
isn’t. In other words, whereas viewers around the world have grown used
to (which is not to say complacent about) geoblocking as a banal
occurrence, it’s something that many Americans likely only have a faint
awareness of, to the extent that they even know it exists. American
viewers that do encounter geoblocking are likely to fall within two
overlapping audiences: diasporic groups and viewers who consciously seek
out media from across borders (for example, cinephiles or fans of
British television). This makes it a somewhat difficult phenomenon to
grasp onto in the country. Geoblocking circumvention certainly doesn’t
have the same currency as it does in, say, Australia or the European
Union. Put simply, most Americans have likely never experienced
geoblocking or, at the very least, do not run into it regularly. Their
relative wealth of access makes geoblocking – and its circumvention –
less of a nationwide *cause célèbre* and more of a ‘niche’ or
intermittent experience.

## Geoblocking and Market Hierarchies

Many platforms that distribute American content use geoblocking, because
the US cultural industries have been particularly militant with regard
to preserving and controlling the distribution paths of intellectual
properties. They do so following a business strategy that industry
executive and author Jeff Ulin refers to as, naturally enough, ‘Ulin's
Rule’, wherein the distribution value of media content is maximized
through the exploitation of four factors: ‘time, repeat consumption
(platforms), exclusivity, and differential pricing’.[^17ElkinsUSA_5] These factors
are controlled through the development and maintenance of distinct
spatial and temporal distribution windows that geoblocking helps
maintain. So, for instance, a film’s US theatrical run would represent
one window, and subsequent availability of that film on Netflix in
Germany a few months later would represent another. In retaining
distribution windows and ordering them along geographic borders (whether
local, national, regional, continental, etc.), certain territories
become more valuable or ‘useful’ to American media firms as markets, and
release dates, prices, and different versions of texts and platforms are
set accordingly. At the risk of generalizing what are in fact rather
complex decisions about global distribution markets, this strategy
enables powerful American media industries to ‘rank’ (even implicitly)
the importance and value of particular markets relative to each other.
In the age of DVD, this ranking was made apparent through the numerical
region code system, with North America designated as Region 1. These
rankings are still present in the practice of geoblocking even if they
are less overt.

As this might indicate, if geoblocking can be explained functionally and
practically by pointing to long-established industry practices, its
cultural impacts are, for many viewers, more damaging and insulting in
their valuing of certain territories over others. For instance, one
*Wired* wiki article on how to access Pandora via VPN refers to
geoblocking as a system of ‘*xenophobic* restrictions \[that\] are the
result of U.S. and international copyright laws and restrictions.’[^17ElkinsUSA_6]
Although it’s not entirely accurate to suggest that geoblocking exists
purely because of copyright law (rather, it comes about through a
combination of copyright restrictions, the media industries’
international distribution and licensing agreements, and platforms not
having been introduced to particular territories), the fact that some
see it as a xenophobic and discriminatory practice spurred on by
predominantly American corporate interests reflects the entanglements
between geoblocking, American industrial power, and cultural difference.
So, in addition to its more practical functions of shaping the
distribution of media content, geoblocking reminds people who live in
particular territories of their place within a global hierarchy of media
access. If geoblocking is about access, and access is connected to
power, then we can begin to think about the cultural and political
consequences of geoblocking and, in turn, the reasons it makes people so
angry. In addition, inquiring about what platforms are unavailable where
(or, if they are technically available, how their costs and content
libraries differ from the same platforms in other countries) raises
questions about *why* the world is marked by differential access to new
media.

If the US and its corporate interests are usually considered major
forces shaping the geoblocking of platforms and content around the
world, this makes geoblocking a tricky and curious phenomenon to
investigate *within* the nation’s borders. Many major entertainment
platforms that remain geoblocked in territories around the world –
Netflix, Amazon Instant Video, Hulu, iTunes, HBO Go – were created by
US-based corporate entities to serve the American market first and
foremost. Hulu in particular can essentially be considered a national
broadcasting platform. Although its library has since grown to
incorporate film, cable and “international” TV programs, trailers, and
news, it was created by two of the major American commercial television
networks (NBC and Fox) as a nationally bound exhibitor of broadcast
programming. So, while geoblocking is not a part of the national
conversation as much as it is in other countries, this doesn’t mean that
it is nonexistent in the US.

## Major Geoblocked Platforms in the United States

The most infamous geoblocked platform in the United States – at least
until 2011 – was the Swedish streaming music platform Spotify. Spotify
was initially only available in Europe, and during its early years
American listeners, critics, and industry figures alike made a lot of
noise about the cornucopia of free (or at least cheap) music that
remained just out of their grasp. While American consumers are less
familiar with the experience of video geoblocking, given the industrial
might of Hollywood, a few common scenarios can nonetheless be identified
and are described below.

#### VOD Platforms Developed in or for Another Territory

A commonly repeated axiom holds that the development of VOD platforms
has lead to – or at least sustains – an increasingly fragmented media
environment. Even a quick look at the vast array of global streaming and
OTT services geoblocked outside of their home countries (BBC’s iPlayer,
Hulu Japan, France’s TF1 on-demand platform, to name just a few) bears
this out.[^17ElkinsUSA_7] Whereas, in the age of DVD, the region-code system ensured
that viewers had to contend with one relatively centralized system of
regional lockout, the issue becomes more complex for viewers contending
with a VOD environment marked by many different options, contingent
availability, and constantly shifting libraries. While seeking out
geographically available platforms can be frustrating for viewers,
sometimes when a VOD platform is geoblocked in the United States, it
doesn’t matter much to American users both because the US offers a
comparable service and because geoblocked platforms naturally will not
expend promotional energy in a territory where it doesn’t exist. For
example, LoveFilm, a Netflix-like British VOD service that was
incorporated into Amazon Prime Instant Video UK in early 2014, was never
particularly missed or lamented in the US. Ask American users if they
wish they had access to LoveFilm, and the only ones likely to have heard
of it will be British expats or tourists. Put simply, with Netflix,
Hulu, and Amazon Prime Instant Video (US) taking up so much space in the
market, American viewers needn’t bother with LoveFilm. Unlike, say,
Spotify, which before its entry into the US market offered something
quite literally unavailable (free, unlimited a la carte streaming of a
seemingly comprehensive popular music library), LoveFilm was just
another VOD service meant for a specific market of UK-based viewers.
Save the frustrations of British ex-pats, tourists, or business
travelers from the UK looking to access their home platform, geoblocking
in this instance shores up a more banal kind of market segmentation.

#### Local, National, and Regional Television Platforms 

As TV networks and channels around the world develop online platforms or
distribute their content to VOD services, they face the problem of
maintaining spatial control over distribution routes. The putatively
global nature of the internet theoretically makes broadcasting’s
long-held and difficult-to-regulate ‘omnidirectionality’ (to quote media
historian Thomas Streeter) even more pronounced.[^17ElkinsUSA_8] However, the
ability to trace the geo-location of internet-connected devices through
IP address filtering actually makes it quite easy for TV networks to
control the distribution of television programming through official,
commercial or public-service streaming platforms.

Given a healthy contingent of Brit TV fans (and \#NBCFail advocates) in
the US, the BBC’s aforementioned iPlayer is routinely one of the most
sought-after geoblocked VOD platforms. An on-demand platform available
via the web and some mobile devices, the iPlayer offers BBC television
and radio programs for streaming or download primarily to users based in
the United Kingdom. Those who pay the UK’s television license fee (an
annual £145.50 fee for all television-owning households that funds the
BBC), have access to both the platform’s livestreamed and on-demand
programming. So, the iPlayer is unavailable to those who don’t or can’t
pay this fee (such as viewers living in the US). And while this
particular geoblocking arrangement reflects the public nature of the
BBC, private-sector platforms in the UK like Sky Go are also geoblocked
to preserve territorial exclusivity of international distribution deals
and to minimize bandwidth costs incurred by out-of-market audiences.

Beyond the US/UK axis, many public and private national or regional
television platforms are unavailable in the US for similar reasons
(i.e., Americans don’t pay taxes and license fees to use the service
and/or broadcasters are beholden to territory-based distribution and
licensing agreements). France’s TF1, Canada’s CBC, Qatar’s Al-Jazeera
(more on them in a bit), Australia’s ABC, and many others have developed
streaming video services that are geoblocked in the US. This can be a
problem for diasporic viewers in particular – including students,
tourists and foreign workers in the United States – who might not care
as much about accessing HBO Go but may want to access media from their
home countries via one of these geoblocked platforms. At the same time,
some media industries that envision their audience as fundamentally
transnational (e.g., Nollywood, Bollywood, various East Asian and Latin
American media companies) distribute their content to VOD platforms that
are *not* geoblocked in the US. These include platforms that specialize
in various kinds of “international” or non-US content (e.g., the
Nollywood streaming service iRokoTV and the Korean TV portal DramaFever)
as well as major US-based platforms like Netflix and Hulu. The latter
have overtly targeted Latino and Mexican-American diasporic audiences in
particular, with Hulu carrying a number of telenovelas through its
partnership with American Spanish-language media company Univision. So,
while VOD and OTT platforms from throughout Latin America, like
Televisa’s Veo app, remain geoblocked within the US, these programs may
be available through other avenues. Indeed, part of the reason these
services are geoblocked in the US is because American cable and
streaming companies own the local rights to programs that would
otherwise be available through those apps. So, the availability of
particular content and platforms can be complicated for diasporic
viewers in the US, and it’s often contingent on how highly the American
media industries value that audience.

#### YouTube, UGC, and Independent Videos Unavailable in the US

Geoblocking in the US (and elsewhere) is not limited to individual
platforms, nor is it necessarily limited to platforms that were
developed as extensions of corporate brands. Often, individual videos or
channels on digital distribution platforms like YouTube will be
geoblocked to certain territories. This has become an issue as the
platform has shifted from distributing exclusively user-generated
content to partnering with major corporations and multi-channel networks
(MCNs). Indeed, YouTube’s policy on geoblocking limits the practice to
corporate users who have a Content ID account (i.e., those who “own
exclusive rights to a substantial body of original material that is
frequently uploaded by the YouTube user community”).[^17ElkinsUSA_9] So, individual
user accounts don’t have the option to geoblock videos, but corporate
media and brand accounts do. And while many of these accounts follow the
standard practice of serving the United States first and foremost and
blocking out other countries, others (again, like the BBC) block US
viewers from their content. Other online video platforms, such as
Dailymotion, allow developers to geoblock videos in particular countries
(including the US) using the platform’s API.

## Moments of Circumvention: Making Geoblocking Visible

These conditions suggest that geoblocking circumvention is a more
specialized practice in the US. This reflects the different standing of
region-free DVD in the US relative to much of the rest of the world
during the DVD era. While region-free players were common in many
nations during the 1990s and 2000s, in the United States they were
harder to come by, and mostly found within immigrant and cinephile
communities.[^17ElkinsUSA_10] Although the fragmented nature of the streaming video
environment and the secretive nature of circumventing geoblocking make
it difficult to precisely calculate who regularly engages in the
practice, one can surmise that these same audience segments would be
drawn to circumvention practices for many of the same reasons that they
sought out region-free DVD players.

But beyond speculating, where can we actually observe the most visible
and pronounced moments of geoblocking circumvention in the US? As I
alluded to, Americans more broadly tend to become aware of geoblocking
during moments like the Olympics or the World Cup, when they seek out
broadcasts (and announcers) perceived as superior to the US’s often poor
coverage. Diasporic viewers and ex-pats looking for media from their
home countries can also run into geoblocking – British-American viewers
attempting to access the iPlayer or Venezuelan-Americans bumping into
the geoblocked Venevisión YouTube channel, for instance. As with many of
the other examples in this book, these viewers look to proxies and VPNs.
Of course, most online guides instructing users on how to use VPNs
address, even implicitly, a non-US audience, as these tend to be the
viewers who more regularly experience the frustration of geoblocking.
Even some of the exceptions to this rule acknowledge that geoblocking is
not primarily a US concern. Many of these come from the blog Lifehacker,
which regularly instructs its primarily US-based readership on a variety
of tips and hacks meant to make life easier. The blog has posted several
tutorials on how to use VPNs, with one suggesting, ‘Non-U.S. users
frequently encounter the annoyance of geoblocked content when trying to
access popular sites like Hulu, but every now and then we feel the burn
in the States, too.’[^17ElkinsUSA_11] Regardless, popular VPN services like Private
Internet Access, Hide My Ass, and Hola have drawn Americans to their
user base who use it to access platforms like the iPlayer.

Still, VPN use in the US is as much about online security and privacy
broadly as it is about circumventing geoblocks. VPN use is part of a
larger culture of suspicion and caution spurred largely by whistleblower
Edward Snowden’s massive leak of documents revealing the National
Security Agency’s (NSA) spying program. One doesn’t need to spend too
much time on tech sites and forums like Ars Technica, Boing Boing, and
Reddit to find questions, suggestions, and debates surrounding the use
of VPNs and other privacy and security technologies. Much of this
discourse follows a familiar and distinctly American blend of
libertarianism, tech-utopianism, and intense valuation of privacy, and
from the perspective of American users it touches on geoblocking
specifically only intermittently – a state of affairs that contrasts
with many of the global case studies provided in the rest of this book.
Americans concerned with online surveillance compare and contrast VPNs
against other kinds of security and encryption systems (e.g., HTTPS,
Tor), and indeed the security status of the VPN has come into question
as of late due to the recent revelation from the Snowden docs that the
NSA can decrypt VPN communications.

Whether used as a way to circumvent geoblocks or as a more general
anti-surveillance maneuver, VPNs have an anti-establishment edge to
them. Because users often regard geoblocking as an oppressive – or at
least unfair – system of discrimination, there’s a tendency in popular
and academic discourse to celebrate its circumvention as a form of
rebellion against anti-competitive media industries and unjust copyright
regimes. Indeed, in keeping with the close correspondences between the
American tech industries and libertarian ideology, users often argue
that geoblocking violates the free market and oppresses personal
freedoms. But looking at circumvention in the United States, and
considering the privilege that Americans generally enjoy, it’s worth
asking whether US-based users circumventing the geoblocked iPlayer
platform, for example, should be considered resistant – particularly in
an era when public media is routinely under attack. Indeed, a premise
that often shapes popular debates and discussions about geoblocking is
that everyone *should* have access to the same content at the same time
and the same price, regardless of geographic location – a version of a
broader cultural attitude that media scholar Lucas Hilderbrand has
called ‘access entitlement.’[^17ElkinsUSA_12] Because American audiences have
generally enjoyed the privilege that comes with living in a premier
media market, US frustrations about geoblocked platforms reflect
assumptions that Americans should be able to access online art and
entertainment made available to those living in other parts of the
world.

This all indicates that it’s important to consider *why* particular
platforms are geoblocked and under what conditions, as well as what it
means when people try to circumvent geoblocking in these different
conditions. There’s a tendency to assume that because a particular
platform is not available in a territory, the platform owners should be
to blame. But the lack of iPlayer and Al Jazeera English in the United
States in fact speaks not only to the desires of those agencies to
prohibit American viewers from accessing these platforms but also to the
power of the American cable companies in shaping what US viewers do and
don’t have access to. Regarding the iPlayer, the BBC announced that the
platform would be made available in the United States, but that was put
on hold after threats from cable companies who were worried that the
iPlayer would carry shows already aired by US cable network BBC America.
So, the cable networks threatened to stop carrying BBC America if BBC
Worldwide introduced the iPlayer to the US.[^17ElkinsUSA_13] Al Jazeera English is
unavailable for similar reasons. At the launch of cable channel Al
Jazeera America in the United States in 2013, Al Jazeera English
geoblocked its livestream and its YouTube news reports in the US at the
behest of the American cable and satellite companies (though it
eventually dropped the geoblock on the YouTube videos).[^17ElkinsUSA_14]
Essentially, the cable companies wanted to avoid competition from Al
Jazeera English.

One consequence of this is that instead of gaining access to the
‘original’ national version of a platform, US viewers can watch a
different adaptation of it. In other words, geoblocking helps sustain a
‘glocalized’ approach to international expansion wherein products are
adapted to local markets. Now, this isn’t always and necessarily a bad
thing. Presumably, tailoring a product to a local market could make it
more appealing to consumers in that market by making it feel closer to
their own cultural experience. At the same time, British ex-pats and
Anglophiles in the US might want access to the national public BBC
platform rather than (or in addition to) a commercial BBC America
channel that’s clogged with James Bond films and *Star Trek: The Next
Generation* reruns and that offers commercial-interrupted BBC
programming later than its initial UK airdate.[^17ElkinsUSA_15]

More seriously, though, when viewers in the United States, whether part
of a diasporic community or not, want to keep up with news about and
from the Middle East, they have turned to Al Jazeera. Many viewers in
the US perceive Al Jazeera’s coverage as superior to US cable news, and
journalist Max Blumenthal captures the cultural significance of the
geoblocking of Al Jazeera English in his lament that American viewers
will need to use a VPN to find ‘an alternative to the mind-numbing,
sensationalistic content familiar to CNN, Fox News, and MSNBC.’[^17ElkinsUSA_16]
Here, the circumvention of geoblocking takes on a particular social
value in that it enables an escape from the dreck that US news consumers
regularly see. Further, for diasporic viewers living in the US,
circumventing these geoblocks can help them access news or entertainment
from their home territories. Either way, the circumvention of
geoblocking can figure as relief from the hegemony of dominant American
media.

## Conclusion

All this is to say that within a territory that has long operated as a
seat of global power, geoblocking reminds viewers of their place within
hierarchies of cultural power and privilege in a variety of ways. As a
result, the practice of circumvention means something different in
different contexts. On one hand, diasporic viewers who are unable to
access particular platforms might see this as yet another experience
indicating their geo-cultural displacement and their position as viewers
not regularly and immediately catered to by the cultural industries. On
the other hand, for US-based audiences, circumventing geoblocked
platforms can represent a kind of access entitlement presuming that in a
digitally connected age, one *should* be able to access everything. When
this access is interrupted, as in when \#NBCFail led many Americans to
engage in geoblocking circumvention, they serve as reminders that the
United States is not a placeless, universal entity in the global media
economy and that it can be subject to many of the disconnections and
disjunctures that viewers around the world experience more regularly.

**References**

‘Access Pandora from Anywhere in the World’, *Wired How-To Wiki*, 13 May
2010,
[http://howto.wired.com/wiki/Access_Pandora_From_Anywhere_in_the_World](http://howto.wired.com/wiki/Access_Pandora_From_Anywhere_in_the_World).

Appelbaum, Jacob et al., ‘Prying Eyes: Inside the NSA’s War on Internet
Security’, *Der Spiegel*, 28 December 2014,
[http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/inside-the-nsa-s-war-on-internet-security-a-1010361.html](http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/inside-the-nsa-s-war-on-internet-security-a-1010361.html).

Becker, Christine. ‘Access is Elementary: Crossing Television’s
Distribution Borders’, *FlowTV.org*, 13 January 2014,
[http://flowtv.org/2014/01/access-is-elementary-crossing-television’s-distribution-borders-christine-becker-university-of-notre-dame](http://flowtv.org/2014/01/access-is-elementary-crossing-television%E2%80%99s-distribution-borders-christine-becker-university-of-notre-dame).

Blumenthal, Max. ‘Exclusive: Al Jazeera’s English Online US Broadcast to
End with the Launch of Al Jazeera America’, *Mondoweiss*, 1 August 2013,
[http://mondoweiss.net/2013/08/exclusive-al-jazeera-englishs-online-us-broadcast-to-end-with-the-launch-of-al-jazeera-america](http://mondoweiss.net/2013/08/exclusive-al-jazeera-englishs-online-us-broadcast-to-end-with-the-launch-of-al-jazeera-america).

‘Buy Safe and Secure VPN’, *Private Internet Access*,
[https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/pages/buy-vpn](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/pages/buy-vpn).

‘Committee Seeks IT Pricing Equity’, *AAP General News Wire* (Sydney),
29 July 2013.

Ernesto, ‘Find out Who’s Using The Pirate Bay…and Why’, *Torrent Freak*,
29 August 2013,
[https://torrentfreak.com/find-out-whos-using-the-pirate-bay-and-why-130829](https://torrentfreak.com/find-out-whos-using-the-pirate-bay-and-why-130829).

Hern, Alex. ‘BBC iPlayer’s US Rollout Blocked by Cable Networks’, *New
Statesman*, 19 June 2012,
[http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/business/2012/06/bbc-iplayers-us-rollout-blocked-cable-networks](http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/business/2012/06/bbc-iplayers-us-rollout-blocked-cable-networks).

Hilderbrand, Lucas. *Inherent Vice: Bootleg Histories of Video and
Copyright*, Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009.

‘How Content ID Works’, *YouTube Help*, 2015,
[https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/2797370?hl=en](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/2797370?hl=en).

Luh, James C. ‘Breaking Down DVD Borders’, *Washington Post*, 1 June
2001.

Pash, Adam. ‘How to Access the BBC iPlayer (and TV Like Doctor Who) from
Outside the U.K’, *Lifehacker*, 29 March 2010,
[http://lifehacker.com/5504681/how-to-access-the-bbc-iplayer-and-tv-like-doctor-who-from-outside-the-uk](http://lifehacker.com/5504681/how-to-access-the-bbc-iplayer-and-tv-like-doctor-who-from-outside-the-uk).

Roettgers, Janko. ‘Al Jazeera English Unblocks its YouTube Videos for
US-based Viewers’, *Gigaom*, 24 September 2013,
[https://gigaom.com/2013/09/24/al-jazeera-english-unblocks-its-youtube-videos-for-us-based-viewers](https://gigaom.com/2013/09/24/al-jazeera-english-unblocks-its-youtube-videos-for-us-based-viewers).

Santus, Rex, ‘Netflix is Now in 36% of Homes Across the United States’
*Mashable*, 12 March 2015,
[http://mashable.com/2015/03/12/nielsen-ratings-2014](http://mashable.com/2015/03/12/nielsen-ratings-2014).

Stelter, Brian. ‘Hiccup for Debut of Al Jazeera America’, *New York
Times*, 21 August 2013.

Streeter, Thomas. *Selling the Air: A Critique of the Policy of
Commercial Broadcasting in the United States*, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1996.

Turner, Adam. ‘Content Unlimited’, *Sydney Morning Herald*, 14 July
2013,
[http://www.smh.com.au/digital-life/digital-life-news/content-unlimited-20130713-2pr0k.html](http://www.smh.com.au/digital-life/digital-life-news/content-unlimited-20130713-2pr0k.html).

Ulin, Jeff. *The Business of Media Distribution: Monetizing Film, TV,
and Video Content*, Burlington, MA: Focal Press, 2000.

[^17ElkinsUSA_1]: Rex Santus, ‘Netflix is Now in 36% of Homes Across the United
    States’ *Mashable*, 12 March 2015,
    [http://mashable.com/2015/03/12/nielsen-ratings-2014](http://mashable.com/2015/03/12/nielsen-ratings-2014).

[^17ElkinsUSA_2]: Jacob Appelbaum et al., ‘Prying Eyes: Inside the NSA’s War on
    Internet Security’, *Der Spiegel*, 28 December 2014,
    [http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/inside-the-nsa-s-war-on-internet-security-a-1010361.html](http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/inside-the-nsa-s-war-on-internet-security-a-1010361.html).

[^17ElkinsUSA_3]: ‘Buy Safe and Secure VPN’, *Private Internet Access*,
    [https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/pages/buy-vpn](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/pages/buy-vpn).

[^17ElkinsUSA_4]: Ernesto, ‘Find out Who’s Using The Pirate Bay…and Why’, *Torrent
    Freak*, 29 August 2013,
    [https://torrentfreak.com/find-out-whos-using-the-pirate-bay-and-why-130829](https://www.privateinternetaccess.com/pages/buy-vpn).

[^17ElkinsUSA_5]: Jeff Ulin, *The Business of Media Distribution: Monetizing Film,
    TV, and Video Content*, Burlington, MA: Focal Press, 2000, p. 5.

[^17ElkinsUSA_6]: ‘Access Pandora from Anywhere in the World’, *Wired How-To Wiki*,
    13 May 2010,
    [http://howto.wired.com/wiki/Access\_Pandora\_From\_Anywhere\_in\_the\_World](http://howto.wired.com/wiki/Access\_Pandora\_From\_Anywhere\_in\_the\_World).
    My emphasis.

[^17ElkinsUSA_7]: Space is far too limited to catalog the scores of VOD platforms
    available around the world, but a comprehensive, if by this point
    somewhat out-of-date, snapshot of the global streaming film
    landscape can be found in the appendices in Dina Iordanova and
    Stuart Cunningham (eds) *Digital Disruption: Cinema Moves On-Line*,
    St. Andrews: St. Andrews Film Studies, 2012.

[^17ElkinsUSA_8]: Thomas Streeter, *Selling the Air: A Critique of the Policy of
    Commercial Broadcasting in the United States*, Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press, 1996, p. 61.

[^17ElkinsUSA_9]: ‘How Content ID Works’, *YouTube Help*, 2015,
    [https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/2797370?hl=en](https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/2797370?hl=en).

[^17ElkinsUSA_10]: A 2001 *Washington Post* piece reporting on DVD region codes
    suggested that the major consumers of region-free DVD players in the
    US comprised a ‘small market’ made up of ‘immigrants who want to
    watch movies from their home countries, language students, and
    foreign-film enthusiasts.’ James C. Luh, ‘Breaking Down DVD
    Borders’, *Washington Post*, 1 June 2001.

[^17ElkinsUSA_11]: Adam Pash, ‘How to Access the BBC iPlayer (and TV Like Doctor
    Who) from Outside the U.K’.

[^17ElkinsUSA_12]: Lucas Hilderbrand, *Inherent Vice: Bootleg Histories of Video and
    Copyright*, Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009, p. 229.

[^17ElkinsUSA_13]: Alex Hern, ‘BBC iPlayer’s US Rollout Blocked by Cable Networks’,
    *New Statesman*, 19 June 2012,
    [http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/business/2012/06/bbc-iplayers-us-rollout-blocked-cable-networks](http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/business/2012/06/bbc-iplayers-us-rollout-blocked-cable-networks).

[^17ElkinsUSA_14]: Brian Stelter, ‘Hiccup for Debut of Al Jazeera America’, *New
    York Times*, 21 August 2013. On dropping the YouTube geoblock, see
    Janko Roettgers, ‘Al Jazeera English Unblocks its YouTube Videos for
    US-based Viewers’, *Gigaom*, 24 September 2013,
    [https://gigaom.com/2013/09/24/al-jazeera-english-unblocks-its-youtube-videos-for-us-based-viewers](https://gigaom.com/2013/09/24/al-jazeera-english-unblocks-its-youtube-videos-for-us-based-viewers).

[^17ElkinsUSA_15]: For more on the issues that attend geoblocking between the US and
    UK specifically, see Christine Becker, ‘Access is Elementary:
    Crossing Television’s Distribution Borders’, *FlowTV.org*, 13
    January 2014,
    [http://flowtv.org/2014/01/access-is-elementary-crossing-television’s-distribution-borders-christine-becker-university-of-notre-dame](http://flowtv.org/2014/01/access-is-elementary-crossing-television’s-distribution-borders-christine-becker-university-of-notre-dame).

[^17ElkinsUSA_16]: Max Blumenthal, ‘Exclusive: Al Jazeera’s English Online US
    Broadcast to End with the Launch of Al Jazeera America’,
    *Mondoweiss*, 1 August 2013,
    [http://mondoweiss.net/2013/08/exclusive-al-jazeera-englishs-online-us-broadcast-to-end-with-the-launch-of-al-jazeera-america](http://mondoweiss.net/2013/08/exclusive-al-jazeera-englishs-online-us-broadcast-to-end-with-the-launch-of-al-jazeera-america).
