---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 18
Type (formerly called Item): book 
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 
Article-title: Geoblocking and Global Video Culture
Article-status: accepted
Author: Ramon Lobato, James Meese, Juan Llamas-Rodriguez, Cameran Ashraf, Marketa Trimble, Adam Rugg, Florian Hoof, Roland Burke, Jinying Li, Çiğdem Bozdağ, Chris Baumann, Aneta Podkalicka, Chris Baumann, Sandra Hanchard, Vanessa Mendes Moreira de Sa, Hadi Sohrabi, Fidel Alejandro Rodriguez, Evan Elkins.
Author-email: rlobato@swin.edu.au, James.Meese@uts.edu.au
Author-bio:
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
...


# Malaysia: Global Binge-Viewing in a Restrictive State

###Sandra Hanchard###



####DATABOX{.statbox}
- 80%: Proportion of Malaysian internet users who stream or download
video at least once a month[^13HanchardMalaysia_2]
- 5.48 Mbps: Average internet speed[^13HanchardMalaysia_3]
- 140%: Mobile penetration rate, of which 35% are smartphones[^13HanchardMalaysia_4]
- RM8 (US$1.86): Monthly cost of an iFlix annual subscription

####PULL QUOTES
*“iflix will fight entertainment piracy and provide an entirely new and
legitimate way for the region’s hundreds of millions of Internet users
to enjoy their favourite films and television shows.” -* Press release
from Catcha Group’s iFlix, March 2015.[^13HanchardMalaysia_1]

####
Internet circumvention practices in Malaysia are driven by two factors –
the desire for global video content, and the need to avoid surveillance
by local authorities. The population’s growing interest in digital
security and privacy skills are transferrable for both entertainment and
political purposes.

Malaysia is a middle-income country with a growing appetite for digital
technology. The goal of reaching the status of a developed nation by
2020, in terms of technology adoption and literacy, is part of
Malaysia’s national narrative. In the mid-1990s, the Malaysian
government called for a move towards a knowledge-based economy in line
with Vision 2020, a cornerstone policy of former Prime Minister Mahathir
Mohamad. The ‘democratic’ use of the internet was seen as a key means
for ensuring economic prosperity for all. The legacy of this macro
policy has shaped internet-driven economies and startup cultures in
urban-centres. Access to the internet is steady at 67 percent of the
population in 2014, representing more than 20 million users (although
connection speeds are comparatively slow for the Southeast Asian
region).[^13HanchardMalaysia_5] Through smartphone ownership, combined with free public
wi-fi and relatively affordable data plans (for middle-income users), a
substantial portion of Malaysian users have the opportunity to create
and view media-rich content while ‘on the go’. In Kuala Lumpur, netizens
have access to a burgeoning number of co-working hacker spaces, wi-fi
enabled cafés and tech meet-ups. Local movie streaming services such as
iFlix are also starting to appear, giving Malaysian binge viewers yet
another path to the high-quality productions they desire.

This burgeoning internet culture sits uncomfortably with the country’s
restrictive policies on media regulation and political expression.
Malaysians face greater constraints in online consumption and sharing,
with restrictions on freedom of speech through the legacy of colonial
laws such as the Sedition Act. This directly affects user-generated
content which is often political in nature. Therefore, circumvention
tools such as VPNs and proxies have a dual function in this context,
enabling anonymous and unfiltered participation in online political
discussions while also opening up greater access to foreign digital
media content.

## Alternative Paths to Global Video Content

Malaysians’ exposure to global media flows has fuelled a desire for 24/7
access to on-demand video. In 2014, Malaysians spent on average 6 hours
a week watching online videos, compared to 10 hours on television.[^13HanchardMalaysia_6]
Global platforms for video sharing (YouTube, Facebook, Vimeo, Youku,
Tudou), rather than local services, dominate Malaysian consumption.

Malaysians often use YouTube to view full-length movies, whether
serialised or published with advertisements. Services such as Netflix
and Hulu have become popular among those Malaysians who have the
technical expertise and disposable income for a VPN subscription. These
activities are fuelled by the slow delivery of first-release movies and
TV shows to Malaysia – a source of frustration for users. Malaysia’s
largest online community, Lowyat.net contains hundreds of forums on
movies filled with complaints about international content windowing and
time delays. As one user put it around Oscars season, ‘They never
release these movie internationally or did they exclude malaysia from
their marketing plans deliberately? Because malaysia hub of movie
pirates?’[^13HanchardMalaysia_7] Lowyat.net also features boards where users share advice
and tips related to circumvention.

Local streaming startup iFlix launched in Malaysia and the Philippines
in May 2015, as an equivalent service to Netflix. Regionally, iFlix
competes with Singapore-based Singtel’s new VOD service, Hooq. At the
helm of iFlix is the entrepreneur Patrick Grove, who estimates that 90
percent of households in ASEAN households consume pirated content.[^13HanchardMalaysia_8]
Grove believes highly-quality American content is keenly sought after by
Southeast Asian consumers, and that there is space in the market for a
local streaming service as an alternative to torrents (which may be
affected by viruses or malware). Based on an analysis of the content
that has been released on iFlix so far, they do not appear to be
strictly following Malaysian censorship restrictions. This of course
could change as a result of greater scrutiny by the authorities if there
is mainstream adoption of iFlix.

![](imgs/Hanchard_image1.jpeg)

Figure 1. iFlix launched in Malaysia and Philippines in May 2015, as an
equivalent service to Netflix. It provides access to both global and
local content, including well-loved Malaysian film genres

Malaysian users are not just looking for shows from Hollywood. There is
strong demand for movies and dramas from wider Asia, in particular
Korea, Hong Kong, China, Japan and Thailand. There is also a taste for
local popular genres, especially Bahasa-language horror and ghost
dramas, as well as independent cinema. MovieGoGo, a startup which
organises screenings of movies no longer in distribution based on online
votes by enthusiasts,, recently facilitated the theatrical re-release of
the acclaimed Malaysian film *Sepet* by Yasmin Ahmad, loved by many
Malaysians as a major work of national cinema. The gala event, ten years
after the original release date, was well-attended by movie lovers and
original cast members. A series of Malaysian documentaries on iconic
Malaysian film celebrities, including Siti Nurhaliza and P. Ramlee, was
published on iFlix to coincide with Merdeka Day celebrations (national
independence from British colonial rule) in August 2015.
Locally-produced content dominated the top 'viral' videos in Malaysia on
YouTube in 2014.[^13HanchardMalaysia_9]

Malaysian telcos have been actively promoting digital video consumption,
with a number of on-demand multi-screen services available, including
HyppTV Everywhere, Astro-On-The-Go, 1MalaysiaIPTV and Tonton. These and
other subscription services are growing in popularity, supported by the
availability of relatively affordable streaming devices such as Google’s
Chromecast (launched in Malaysia by the local telco giant Maxis), Apple
TV and Roku. One of the motivations for telcos to promote video services
is to encourage users to increase their data limit. In fact, the
national government-owned ISP, Telekom Malaysia promotes the fact that
users can download movies and music quickly through their services, even
though this type of content cannot be downloaded legally in Malaysia.
There is also increasing interest among users in routers and mobile
devices (Android in particular) with pre-installed VPNs.

The VPN market is still maturing in Malaysia. VPNs usually require a
credit card which can be a barrier to Malaysian students, typically the
biggest media consumers. Su Gim Goh, Asia Pacific Security Advisor for
F-Secure, a Finnish IT security firm with offices in Kuala Lumpur, says
that demand for VPNs in Malaysia is not as high in Europe and developed
countries. F-Secure offers their VPN, Freedome, for download on mobile
app stores. Freedome is marketed to consumers based on ease of use,
access to geoblocked content and privacy.

Currently, VPN use is a legal grey area in Malaysia. Downloading content
illegally from global networks effectively has no ramifications for
users in Malaysia because copyright infringement is not heavily policed.
However, current practices of VPN-enabled offshore streaming could have
greater legal ramifications in the future with the introduction of the
U.S. Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement. In Malaysia, as in
other nations, the TPP has been widely criticised by civil society
activists. Khairil Yusof and Ng Swee Meng of Sinar Project, a Malaysian
non-governmental organization (NGO) that advocates for government
transparency, say that acceptance of the TPP in Malaysia would not
guarantee better digital content for Malaysians. Sinar Project notes
that even if Malaysians could access global TV content legally, there
would be no guarantee users would get the content they want, given
stricter censorship rules in Malaysia.

## Privacy Concerns and Circumventing Surveillance

These audience practices should be understood in the context of
Malaysia’s politically restrictive environment. Despite a programme of
economic empowerment in the 1990s by the Government, the Malaysian state
can still be described as authoritarian. As a result, Malaysian internet
users are increasingly cautious about what they say online, and what
video content they post on social media – especially given the high
degree of connectedness within and between social networks. An
increasing awareness of being ‘watched’ by authorities online is in
tension with traditional communal values influencing tendencies to chat
openly, at least in social contexts.

The internet once offered a compelling ‘democratic’ space, through the
MSC Bill of Guarantees, for Malaysians to access content ‘free’ from
state censorship. In contrast, the traditional press and broadcasting
industries are tightly controlled and censored by the government. The
Printing Presses and Publications Act (1984), which regulates the press,
and the Communications and Multimedia Act (1998), which applies to
broadcast and online media, directly empower ministers to determine who
can own and operate media companies. As a result there is a
concentration in ownership and alignment of outlets with political
parties. In the television industry for example, the major media
conglomerate, Media Prima owns all the major private stations. Media
Prima is also linked to the political group, United Malaysia Nasional
Organisation (UMNO).

Recent legislative attempts to curtail freedom of expression online have
been condemned by internet freedom activists. Khairil Yusof, of Sinar
Project, wryly muses that the current climate has created an internet
where it is only safe in Malaysia to post videos of ‘cute kittens’.[^13HanchardMalaysia_10]
Amendments to the Evidence Act in 2012 mean that all internet users,
ISPs and wi-fi providers are liable for content posted through their
registered networks.[^13HanchardMalaysia_11] The Sedition Act – purportedly used by the
Malaysian Government to temper hostility between the major ethnic
groups, Malay, Chinese and Indian – has also been widely used to curtail
legitimate political dissent. In 2015, amendments were made to the
Sedition Act which could block social media platforms as publishers, and
which increased penalties for users who post ‘seditious’ content.
Malaysian technology consultant Keith Rozario says that with the
Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA) passed in 2015, the authorities have
granted broad powers to intercept and store the communications of
millions of Malaysians.

VPNs in Malaysia are increasingly marketing their services with
reference to security and surveillance. Hide.me, a fast-growing
Malaysian-based VPN, promises that with their encrypted tunnel ‘you’re
safe to say and do what you want on the internet’. Su Gim Goh of
F-Secure stresses that Malaysians should be more concerned with how
their personal activity can be tracked, given the sensitivity of data
being collected through high mobile usage. While there are choices in
local and global VPNs available, Malaysians often wish to opt for global
providers, out of concerns that local services, such as BolehVPN, might
be subject to government data requests.

Advocacy initiatives around privacy and circumvention are developing in
Malaysia. A niche cyberactivist culture has emerged, comprised of both
hackers and journalists. NGOs such as Sinar Project recognise there is a
pressing need to educate the wider public, beyond binge video viewers,
about circumvention tools and services, and started running a Digital
Security and Privacy education workshop in August 2015. This workshop
was designed for at-risk users in Malaysia, including LGBT people,
religious groups, activists and journalists. Nearly half of the
attendees at the first workshop were journalists, who were interested in
practical steps for identity protection. Topics covered included threat
modelling, metadata, and suspected government surveillance and
interception techniques. Users were advised to protect their online
identity through password management, encryption, fake names, VPNs,
Tails and Tor, amongst other approaches. One tactic suggested for
citizens posting content that might be deemed seditious was to
re-circulate content as widely as possible, to make it impractical for
authorities to enforce charges on any one person.

Digital security and privacy practices are increasingly relevant where
the Malaysian middle-class has become politically mobilised. There is
widespread dissatisfaction with the Malaysian Government over
allegations of corruption, especially in the wake of the recent scandal
involving 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB), an economic development
company owned by the Government, in which $700 million in public funds
were allegedly diverted to the bank account of Prime Minister Najib
Razak.[^13HanchardMalaysia_12] Digital security skills were particularly relevant for the
*Bersih* 4 protests, a movement which called for a ‘clean’ and
transparent Government, over the Merdeka national holiday weekend in
August 2015. The city was filled with hundreds of thousands of yellow
t-shirts (a symbol for *Bersih*), with many protesters opting to sleep
on the streets over the weekend. Users expressed fears about ‘signal
blocking’ by authorities on apps such as Firechat, which was used for
organising meeting points, sharing reliable up-to-date information and
sharing user videos of the protest. The online news website Malaysiakini
launched their Prime app to coincide with the rally, and this was
officially adopted by the organizers of *Bersih* 4.

## Futures of Online Consumption and Sharing in Malaysia 

Malaysians users are resourceful; they will adopt practices required to
access and post media content unhindered. Circumvention skills for
gaining access to entertainment content are now being transferred for
other uses, including to avoid penalties for posting politically
sensitive content. Malaysia’s large middle-class, which generally enjoys
access to higher education, is a significant force to contend with for
both commercial entities that attempt to control content distribution
through geoblocking and government authorities that attempt to curtail
dissenting user-generated content. Debates about access to global
entertainment and politically sensitive local content continue,
alongside parallel debates about the ethics and legality of consumption
and circumvention. While competing services such as iFlix and Hooq will
make it easier for Malaysians to access global content, especially from
the United States and Korea, the production of local content may see
stronger support with platforms committed to serving Malaysian films,
dramas and documentaries. We are likely to see further cultural nuances
of sharing content openly and privately, as Malaysians gain a greater
appreciation of who may be watching them.

## Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank Khairil Yusof and Ng Swee Meng of Sinar
Project; Su Gim Goh, Security Advisor for F-Secure; Keith Rozario,
Technology Consultant; and Alan Chong, Founder of MovieGoGo, for their
insightful comments.


## References

Asohan, A. ‘Govt Stealthily Gazettes Evidence Act Amendment, Law is Now
in Operation’, *Digital News Asia*, 8 August 2012,
[http://www.digitalnewsasia.com/digital-economy/govt-stealthily-gazettes-evidence-act-amendment-law-is-now-in-operation](http://www.digitalnewsasia.com/digital-economy/govt-stealthily-gazettes-evidence-act-amendment-law-is-now-in-operation).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ‘Netflix-type Wars: Grove’s Catcha Takes on
Singtel’s Hooq with iflix’, *Digital News Asia*, 10 March 2015,
[https://www.digitalnewsasia.com/startups/netflix-type-wars-grove-catcha-takes-on-singtel-hooq-with-iflix](https://www.digitalnewsasia.com/startups/netflix-type-wars-grove-catcha-takes-on-singtel-hooq-with-iflix).

Boo, Su-lyn and Shaun Tan. ‘With Revised Sedition Act, Only “Cute
Kittens” Left on Social Media’, *The Malay Mail Online*, 10 April 2015,
[http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/with-revised-sedition-act-only-cute-kittens-left-on-social-media](http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/with-revised-sedition-act-only-cute-kittens-left-on-social-media).

ecommerceMilo. ‘With 140% Mobile Penetration, Malaysia has 10M
Smartphone Users”, *e27*, 5 March 2014,

e27 [http://e27.co/140-mobile-penetration-malaysia-10m-smartphone-users/](http://e27.co/140-mobile-penetration-malaysia-10m-smartphone-users/).

Internet World Stats. ‘Asia Internet Usage Stats Facebook and Population
Statistics’, 30 June 2015, [http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm](http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm).

The Malay Mail Online. ‘”Rewind” the Year — YouTube Recaps 2014’s Top
Videos,’ 10 December 2014,
[http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/rewind-the-year-youtube-recaps-2014s-top-videos](http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/rewind-the-year-youtube-recaps-2014s-top-videos).

The Star Online. ‘Rais: Malaysia Will Stop Access to “Innocence of
Muslims” Film’, 1 June 2013,
[http://www.thestar.com.my/News/Nation/2012/09/15/Rais-Malaysia-will-stop-access-to-Innocence-of-Muslims-film/](http://www.thestar.com.my/News/Nation/2012/09/15/Rais-Malaysia-will-stop-access-to-Innocence-of-Muslims-film/).

Tay, Daniel. ‘iFlix Brings Hollywood to Southeast Asia’, *Tech In Asia*,
10 March 2015,
[https://www.techinasia.com/iflix-brings-hollywood-to-southeast-asia/](https://www.techinasia.com/iflix-brings-hollywood-to-southeast-asia/).

The Wall Street Journal, ‘Scandal in Malaysia’, 5 July 2015,
[http://www.wsj.com/articles/scandal-in-malaysia-1436113149](http://www.wsj.com/articles/scandal-in-malaysia-1436113149).

Wong, Kenneth. ‘2014 Malaysia Digital Media Landscape', presentation at
ad:tech Roadshow Kuala Lumpur. Data sourced from comScore and Nielsen,
[http://www.adtechkl.com/images/ppt/mda\_kenneth\_wong.pdf](http://www.adtechkl.com/images/ppt/mda\_kenneth\_wong.pdf).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_1]: A. Asohan, ‘Netflix-type Wars: Grove’s Catcha Takes on Singtel’s
    Hooq with iflix’, *Digital News Asia,* 10 March 2015,
    [https://www.digitalnewsasia.com/startups/netflix-type-wars-grove-catcha-takes-on-singtel-hooq-with-iflix](https://www.digitalnewsasia.com/startups/netflix-type-wars-grove-catcha-takes-on-singtel-hooq-with-iflix).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_2]: Kenneth Wong, 'Ad:tech Roadshow Kuala Lumpur 2014' (Malaysia
    Digital Association, 2014),
    [http://www.adtechkl.com/images/ppt/mda\_kenneth\_wong.pdf](http://www.adtechkl.com/images/ppt/mda\_kenneth\_wong.pdf). Data
    source: Nielsen.

[^13HanchardMalaysia_3]: Christina Chin, 'Speed Slower than Vietnam and Cambodia', *The
    Star Online*, 2014,
    [http://www.thestar.com.my/News/Nation/2014/05/04/Our-Internet-not-so-broadband-after-all-Speed-slower-than-Vietnam-and-Cambodia/](http://www.thestar.com.my/News/Nation/2014/05/04/Our-Internet-not-so-broadband-after-all-Speed-slower-than-Vietnam-and-Cambodia/).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_4]: ecommerceMilo, ‘With 140% Mobile Penetration, Malaysia has 10M
    Smartphone Users’, *e27*, 5 March 2014, [http://e27.co/140-mobile-penetration-malaysia-10m-smartphone-users/](http://e27.co/140-mobile-penetration-malaysia-10m-smartphone-users/).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_5]: Internet World Stats, 'Asia Internet Usage Stats Facebook and
    Population Statistics', [http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm](http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_6]: Kenneth Wong, '2014 Malaysia Digital Media Landscape', presentation at ad:tech Roadshow Kuala Lumpur, 2014,
    [http://www.adtechkl.com/images/ppt/mda\_kenneth\_wong.pdf](http://www.adtechkl.com/images/ppt/mda\_kenneth\_wong.pdf). Data
    sourced from comScore and Nielsen.

[^13HanchardMalaysia_7]: [https://forum.lowyat.net/topic/905692/all](https://forum.lowyat.net/topic/905692/all).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_8]: Daniel Tay, ‘iFlix brings Hollywood to Southeast Asia’, *Tech In
    Asia*, 2015,
    [https://www.techinasia.com/iflix-brings-hollywood-to-southeast-asia/](https://www.techinasia.com/iflix-brings-hollywood-to-southeast-asia/).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_9]: The Malay Mail Online, '"Rewind" the Year — YouTube Recaps 2014’s
    Top Videos', *The Malay Mail Online*, 2014,
    [http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/rewind-the-year-youtube-recaps-2014s-top-videos](http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/rewind-the-year-youtube-recaps-2014s-top-videos).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_10]: Su-lyn Boo and Shaun Tan, 'With Revised Sedition Act, Only "Cute
    Kittens" Left on Social Media', *The Malay Mail Online*, 10 April
    2015,
    [http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/with-revised-sedition-act-only-cute-kittens-left-on-social-media](http://www.themalaymailonline.com/malaysia/article/with-revised-sedition-act-only-cute-kittens-left-on-social-media).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_11]: A. Asohan, 'Govt Stealthily Gazettes Evidence Act Amendment, Law
    is Now in Operation', *Digital News Asia*, 8 August 2012,
    [http://www.digitalnewsasia.com/digital-economy/govt-stealthily-gazettes-evidence-act-amendment-law-is-now-in-operation](http://www.digitalnewsasia.com/digital-economy/govt-stealthily-gazettes-evidence-act-amendment-law-is-now-in-operation).

[^13HanchardMalaysia_12]: The Wall Street Journal, ‘Scandal in Malaysia’, 5 July 2015,
    [http://www.wsj.com/articles/scandal-in-malaysia-1436113149](http://www.wsj.com/articles/scandal-in-malaysia-1436113149).
