---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 18
Type (formerly called Item): book 
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 
Article-title: Geoblocking and Global Video Culture
Article-status: accepted
Authors: Ramon Lobato, James Meese, Juan Llamas-Rodriguez, Cameran Ashraf, Marketa Trimble, Adam Rugg, Florian Hoof, Roland Burke, Jinying Li, Çiğdem Bozdağ, Chris Baumann, Aneta Podkalicka, Chris Baumann, Sandra Hanchard, Vanessa Mendes Moreira de Sa, Hadi Sohrabi, Fidel Alejandro Rodriguez, Evan Elkins.
Author-email: rlobato@swin.edu.au, James.Meese@uts.edu.au
Author-bio:
Abstract: Video platforms like Youtube, IPlayer, DailyMotion, Netflix, Periscope and Youku use geoblocking to filter international audiences. Geoblocking and Global Video Culture examines the geography of video streaming across different cultures. Studying the linkages between various blocking and circumvention practices and the tactics people use to get around them. The research decodes the approach to geoblocking in various countries like China, Iran, Malaysia, Turkey, Cuba, Brazil, USA, Sweden and Australia, by analyzing how different users negotiate geoblocking and internet filtering controls. This collection of essays offer a series of distinctive stories about this fast-changing and complex issue. Keywords:internet censorship, copyright, Institute of Network Cultures, video distribution, public sphere, proxy filtering, P2P file-sharing, territorialisation, geographies of control, surveillance, VPN, connectivity, anonymity, IP-address, digital infrastructure, USA, China, Sweden, Turkey, Australia, Malaysia, Brazil, Iran, Cuba, piracy, privacy, streaming aggregation platforms, mobile video culture, authorized and unauthorized channels, site-blocking, circumvention practices 
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
Font(s) used: Open Sans
...

#Iran: A Friction between State Ideology and Network Society

###Hadi Sohrabi
*Swinburne University of Technology*

###Behzad Dowran
*Iranian Research Institute for Information Science & Technology
(IranDoc)*

  
<div class="statbox">
- 75 million: total population
- 23 million: estimated number of internet users
- 69 %: percentage of internet users who use circumvention tools
- 330,000: number of Twitter followers for President Rouhani, despite Twitter being banned in Iran
 
 
> President Rouhani:‘Supporters of internet filtering should explain whether they've successfully restricted access to information? Which important piece of news has filtering been able to black out in recent years?’

</div>

The Iranian movie *Bullet Proof* (dir. Mostafa Kiayee, 2012) depicts the
rise of audio-visual black markets after the 1979 Islamic revolution.
Losing his music store during Islamization, our protagonist Salim starts
to sell unauthorized products on the black market. In one scene, Salim
leaves his house with a bag full of unauthorized audio cassette tapes.
At a street stall, a chubby boy is calling out ‘New Cassette!’, ‘New
Cassette!’, but he changes his words to ‘New Ahangaran![^1]’ when an
Islamist militiaman is passing. Salim meets his business partner in a
public park to deliver the bag, but the Revolutionary Guard officers
chase them and arrest his partner; Salim manages to run away. Twenty
years later, we see Salim has upgraded his devices to CDs and DVDs
instead of audio cassettes. He is also negotiating with a partner to
enter into an emerging market: satellite dishes.

The movie portrays the black market keeping pace with technological
changes, from audio and video cassettes in the 1980s to DVDs and
satellite television in the 2000s. Soon after the 1979 Islamic
revolution, the clerical rulers imposed Islamic principles on almost all
social and political institutions, from marriage, divorce and penal
codes to banking and commerce. The state attempted not only to transform
social and political structures, but also to control people’s moral
attitudes. Books, newspapers, magazines, music, and movies were
subjected to extensive regulation and censorship. The state-owned
television and radio dominated the media landscape in the
post-revolutionary era.

The new regime presented its restrictive policies as defending Islam and
Iranian national interests against western ‘cultural invasion’ and ‘soft
war’. Underlying these representations were the authorities’ concerns
about the increasing secularization of society and the growing
alienation of youth from the state. Unwilling to acknowledge the
ineffectiveness of forceful Islamization, the hardliners have accused
the western media of subverting Islamic values and threatening the
state’s political legitimacy.

The black market of CDs and DVDs is still alive. Around Enqelab square
in Tehran, many video dealers sell uncensored Hollywood movies. At times
the police raid the area and confiscate the DVDs. Nevertheless, the
internet and satellite television have largely replaced such markets.
Reducing the regime’s grip on information flow, new communication
technologies have provided Iranians with unprecedented access to global
news, information, and images. Feeling gravely threatened, the
government has invested vast sums of money, instituted several councils
and bodies, and devised many policies, laws and regulations to control
and curb cross-border information flow. In what follows, we describe the
methods employed by the government to restrict citizens’ access to
global media content and those employed by citizens to circumvent
censorship – from illegal satellite dishes to VPNs, proxies and
peer-to-peer networking. In particular, we focus on the internet and
satellite television, the technologies that have generated significant
political and cultural conflicts in Iran and created video cultures
outside official channels.

##Satellite Television: a New Video Culture

To understand Internet circumvention in Iran, we must take a step back
to consider an earlier kind of unauthorised media. Since the 1990s,
foreign-based Persian-language satellite channels have mushroomed,
posing a serious challenge to the regime’s monopoly over broadcast
media. The satellite television networks offer all sorts of programs,
ranging from news, commentary and politics to music, entertainment and
soap operas. The state has banned satellite television ‘to protect the
country’s cultural borders and the foundations of family’ against
immoral content. The law bans selling, buying, installing, and using
satellite television equipment such as dishes and receivers.
Nevertheless, the majority of Iranians easily access these channels by
installing dishes on rooftops and balconies. The Minister of Culture and
Islamic Guidance, Ali Jannati, reported that 71 per cent of people in
Tehran watch satellite TV.[^2] Although this figure is likely to be
inflated, watching satellite TV has no doubt become a widespread
practice among city dwellers.

The authorities have used various methods of crackdown. At times, the
police raid buildings and confiscate dishes. They have used helicopters
to scan rooftops and cranes to seize dishes from balconies. Police have
abseiled down the sides of tall buildings in search of dishes. These
methods have largely been futile because the dishes have soon reappeared
on rooftops. These familiar cat-and-mouse games have been memorably
depicted in Iranian movies such as Parisa Bakhtavar’s *Tambourine* and
Abdolreza Kahani’s *Absolute Rest*.

The state has also employed more sophisticated and effective methods
such as satellite jamming. Powerful noise signals are sent directly to
satellites such as HotBird and Eutelsat, mixing frequencies and jamming
their signals. Home viewers then see scrambled images on screen. BBC
Persian and Voice of America (VoA) have been the typical targets. Iran
has never acknowledged using such methods, but international
organizations have claimed that the jamming signals are sent from within
Iran. The UN telecommunications body (ITU) and the European Union have
called on the Iranian government to stop satellite jamming and
‘electronic interference’. It is also widely believed that the
Revolutionary Guard runs the jamming system. Not surprisingly, the
regime uses this method more actively at times of political upheaval and
during elections.

Despite the attempts outlined above, Iranians have integrated satellite
television into their daily lives. Political channels such as BBC
Persian and Voice of America (VoA) continue to influence public opinion
by highlighting and disseminating news, images, videos and information
that the state tries to suppress. Persian-language entertainment
channels such as Manoto have attracted large audience by running
western-style talent shows and competitions. Other channels such as GEM
TV and Farsi One have attracted viewers by screening popular movies and
soap operas. None of the above mentioned methods have proved effective
in discouraging ordinary people from watching satellite TV. At times of
political upheaval, the state has been relatively successful in jamming
some political channels; at other times, however, satellite channels
have managed to reach out to viewers and help create a video culture
very different from the ideologically-fuelled one promoted by the state
television.

##A Halal Internet

Statistics on the number of Iranian internet users are inconsistent.
While the Iranian government counts about 40 million internet users out
of a population of 75 million, the World Bank estimates the number to be
around 23 million.[^3] The Iranian Minister of Culture and Islamic
Guidance, Ali Jannati, reported that 9.5 million Iranians use Viber and
4 to 5 million use Facebook.[^4] Although the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights considers everyone entitled ‘to seek, receive and impart
information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers’,
Iran, which is a signatory, has blocked social media sites such as
Facebook and YouTube, political dissidents’ blogs and websites, and
international news websites.

The London-based advocacy group Small Media reports a threefold strategy
employed by the government to control the internet. Firstly, Authorities
aim to ‘prevent’ users from accessing the perceived threatening content
through keyword filtering, URL blacklisting, and broadband speed
limitations. For example, users who attempt to access YouTube see the
following image, which reads: ‘Access to the requested website is not
possible’, and introduces a list of miscellaneous websites. Next, they
exploit technology to ‘intercept’ those who have managed to get around
censorship through monitoring, tracking and blocking internet traffic.
Lastly, internet activists and developers are arrested and connections
are throttled during political turmoils.[^5]

![](imgs/iran.png)

Figure 1. Iranian internet users see this government notice when trying to
access blocked websites. It reads: “Access to the requested website is
not possible. Please click here to access reports and complaints”

Taking office as President in 2013, Hassan Rouhani criticized internet
censorship, raising hopes for reducing internet barriers (to be
discussed further below). However, he faced fierce opposition from
conservative rivals. In 2014, as soon as the ICT ministry issued 3G and
4G licenses to two mobile-phone operators, a leading cleric called on
the government to revoke them because ‘dirty pictures and clips’ could
poison young minds.[^6] Comparing these technologies to ‘unsanitary and
muddy water’, and worrying about ‘all sorts of polluted films without
any filtering’, he declared that ‘3G mobile communication services and
higher are against Sharia \[Islamic law\] and moral and human norms’.

Perhaps Iran’s most ambitious plan for extending its control over the
internet has been the launching of a “walled-off” national internet. The
network will connect government ministries, universities, banks,
healthcare, tax systems, and other state institutions through local
servers. Although users will benefit from higher speed and better
cyber-security, many are concerned that the government’s main motive is
to consolidate its control over the internet. In response to such
concerns, Iran’s ICT minister, Mahmoud Vaezi, claimed that the national
internet ‘is not in competition with the Internet’ and that ‘if users
cannot find the data that they are looking for on the national internet,
then they will be able to access the Internet to search for it,
instead’.[^7] Put it simply, the government aims to obtain the capacity
of switching off the internet without disrupting public services, banks,
and corporations. It is, however, unlikely that the government could
completely detach Iran from the global internet; the more likely outcome
would be a ‘dual-internet structure’ like that currently used in some
other authoritarian countries.[^8]

Work on the national internet project started in 2005, and has
progressed slowly since then. In recent years, at least two events
caused the conservative authorities to be more determined to carry the
project through. In the aftermath of the 2009 presidential election,
where millions of Iranians took to the streets to protest against
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s disputed victory, the regime experienced an
unprecedented challenge to official media control. During rallies,
protesters used their mobile phones to take pictures and video footage
of police brutality and violence, posting them on social media. Global
news coverage of the regime’s brutal crackdown led to the condemnation
of the regime by many international human rights organizations and
governments. The second alarming event was the Stuxnet attacks on
Iranian nuclear facilities in 2010, where the country’s prized nuclear
arsenal was overtaken by a computer virus, thus highlighting the
perceived threat posed by foreign, unauthorised digital technologies to
the Iranian state.

##Internet Circumvention Tools

Despite government restrictions, users often find ways to get around
internet censorship. In a survey conducted by Iran’s Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sport, 69 per cent of respondents said they use
anti-filtering software.[^9] Ironically, users can even buy VPNs through
official online payment gateways, such as PardakhtNet! Given how easily
available these VPN services are, it is widely believed that segments of
the ruling establishment (including elements within the Revolutionary
Guard) facilitate the trade to earn money.[^10] In this environment,
critics rightly question the effectiveness of numerous laws, policies,
and regulations in place to control internet access. Criticizing his
conservative opponents, the moderate president Hassan Rouhani asked:
‘Supporters of internet filtering should explain whether they've
successfully restricted access to information? Which important piece of
news has filtering been able to black out in recent years?’ He
continued: ‘Filtering has not even stopped people from accessing
unethical \[pornographic\] websites. Widespread online filtering will
only increase distrust between the people and the state’[^11].

Users take advantage of numerous tools to get around censorship. A
Freedom House survey revealed that VPNs, Google (Reader, Translation,
Cache), and Your Freedom are the most popular circumvention tools in
Iran. The survey listed the most popular tools in Iran as the following:
Dynaweb, Freegate, Freenet, Garden GTunnel, Google, Gpass,
HotspotShield, JAP, Proxy, Psiphon, Tor, Ultrasurf, Your Freedom, and
VPN.[^12] Filtershekanha (means ‘Filter breakers’) is an email list with
over 100,000 subscribers through which information about VPNs is
distributed among users. Another survey of 423 users, conducted by Small
Media, found that Hotspot Shield, Psiphon, and Kerio are favored by
users.[^13] Other surveys have also reported the widespread use of the
web proxy service Hotspot Shield and Psiphon3, a peer-to-peer VPN app
for Android and Windows.[^14] As of 2013, Psiphon claimed to have
700,000 to 900,000 daily unique users in Iran. This number is now
believed to have surpassed one million.[^15]

Small Media reports that the terrain of Internet circumvention is
increasingly shifting to mobile, with the most popular tools having
easy-to-use mobile-enabled interfaces now. It also points out that, TOR,
despite its strong privacy protection, is not very popular among
Iranians partly because it has been constantly attacked by the
government. Overall, Iranians seem to care more about ease of access
than security. There are also anti-filtering tools that are unique to
Iran. For example, Simurgh is ‘Iranian stand-alone proxy software’ which
has been widely used since 2009; due to its small size (1 MB), users
with low speed connection can download it easily. It is also free. This
software has been recently used by Syrian dissidents.[^16]

##The Political Context of Circumvention

Despite common perceptions, most Iranians do not go online specifically
in search of ‘forbidden’ political material; rather they wish to ‘live
their normal lives’ by accessing social media such as Telegram, Viber,
Facebook and the like to communicate with their family members and
friends. They share photos, music videos, comedies, shows, and
educational material within their social circles; they look for
entertainment, search for all sorts of information and read news online.
A question that naturally arises is: why then are authorities so
sensitive about the free internet? The answer has to do with the
ideological nature of the Iranian state.

The clerics and conservative rulers censor the internet for the same
reason that they have put in place extremely restrictive measures to
uphold Islamic principles and moral standards in public spaces. They are
concerned that freedom will inevitably give rise to western lifestyles,
mixing with the opposite sex and promiscuity. Despite extensive
regulation, conservatives are constantly complaining about the growing
un-Islamic practices in society. The same concerns lead them to oppose
the unfettered internet. In their view, the free internet would weaken
their grip over cultural production and consumption. In a country where
interactions between young men and women are severely controlled, it is
not surprising that the authorities are worried about online
communication. The political power of religion in Iran does not allow
for a cultural sphere separate from politics.

Finally, it is worth noting an important difference between Iran and
other cases discussed in this book. Iranians struggle with filtering as
much as internet speed. Authorities have kept the speed extremely slow
as a deliberate method to frustrate users and discourage them from
downloading photos and videos. Based on nationwide regulations, ISPs are
permitted to provide speed connection only up to 128 kbps to home users,
which is 50 times slower than the internet speed in the US.[^17]
Academics and professionals could receive higher speed up to 512 kbps
and in special circumstances up to 2 mbps. As mentioned earlier, the
government attempt at providing higher speed 3G and 4G licences to
mobile operators was strongly opposed by Parliament and influential
clerics. Conservatives continue to obstruct any attempt at raising
internet speed until the national internet comes into full operation.
They call the national internet a ‘Halal’ internet, an expression that
reveals their concerns about the cultural impact of the free internet
and the potential rise of a video culture that could jeopardise their
cherished values.

##Future Trends 

The Islamic Republic of Iran has struggled to maintain and strengthen
cultural sovereignty within its borders. By establishing numerous
cultural, political, and legal institutions, the regime has invested
enormously in constructing and imposing Islamic identity on all spheres
of social life. The state has set itself the ambitious task not only of
restructuring the entire society on the basis of Islamic values, but
also of controlling and guiding people’s thoughts and morality. The
policies, however, have not been executed very effectively and
consistently. Constitutionally, Iranians vote in the government through
elections, and despite all state restrictions, at times people have
defeated the ruling conservatives. President Khatami (1997-2005)
campaigned for social and political freedom and sought constructive
engagement with the West, policies that were strongly resisted by
hardliners. In 2013, Hassan Rouhani won the presidential election after
campaigning on moderate foreign and domestic policies. Many hoped that
his government would reduce internet barriers and relax
ultraconservative regulation of culture and politics.

President Rouhani has symbolically and rhetorically opposed state
censorship. While Twitter is blocked in Iran, Rouhani’s Twitter account
has over 330,000 followers. Zarif, the foreign minister, actively tweets
about Iran’s foreign policy issues. Rouhani has called internet
filtering ‘futile’, saying: ‘We cannot close the gates of the world to
our young generation’.[^18] Despite these positive signs, as far as
media censorship is concerned, Rouhani’s discretion is limited. The
decision-making bodies are supra-governmental and mostly controlled by
the conservatives. The Supreme Council of Cyberspace (SCC), which is the
highest state organization responsible for devising cyber policies,
works under the supreme leader’s directive. Given these limitations, a
radical and thoroughgoing change would be unlikely to happen. At best,
Rouhani’s policies will bring about slow and incremental changes in the
coming years.

The friction between state policies and social reality in Iran offers an
intriguing case for media analysts. Technological changes have provided
a good opportunity for ordinary citizens to circumvent barriers and
access global media content. On the other hand, the state has
sophisticated its methods and technologies to maintain its dominance
over information flows. Iranian moderate politicians feel the state will
ultimately lose this game. The Culture and Islamic Guidance minister,
Ali Jannati, compared the current prohibition of satellite television
and social media to the banning of video cassettes in the 1980s, as
portrayed in the movie Bullet Proof. Calling such policies ‘ridiculous’,
he said: ‘Maybe in five years we will laugh at today’s actions’.[^19]
However, given that the Iranian Islamic state has defined its identity
in opposition to western culture and imperial powers, it will continue
to actively resist pressure from the western-controlled global media in
order to maintain the existing media communication boundaries in the
foreseeable future.

##References

Bowen, Kyle and James Marchant. ‘Internet Censorship in Iran:
Preventative, Interceptive, and reactive, *Small Media report:
Revolution Decoded*, 2014, p.26,
[http://smallmedia.org.uk/revolutiondecoded/](http://smallmedia.org.uk/revolutiondecoded/).

Derakhshesh, Setareh. ‘Breaking the Law to Go Online in Iran’, New York
Times, 24 June 2014,
[http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/25/opinion/breaking-the-law-to-go-online-in-iran.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/25/opinion/breaking-the-law-to-go-online-in-iran.html).

Erdbrink, Thomas. ‘Tehran Unfetters Cellphones, and the Pictures Start
Flowing’, *The New York Times*, 2 September 2014,
[http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/03/world/asia/iran-speeds-up-cellphone-connections.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/03/world/asia/iran-speeds-up-cellphone-connections.html).

Freedom House. ‘Country Report for End Users in Iran’, 2011,
[https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/LOtF\_Iran.pdf](https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/LOtF\_Iran.pdf).

Iranian Student News Agency. ‘69 Per Cent of Iranian Youth Use
Anti-Filtering, According to the Findings of a New Survey’, 27 April
2015, [http://isna.ir/fa/news/93061710204](http://isna.ir/fa/news/93061710204).

Iran’s Internet Penetration Management Portal. Penetration Rate Report,
2014, [http://www.iriu.ir/matma/;](http://www.iriu.ir/matma/;).

Kamali-Dehghan, Saeed. ‘Iran’s President Signals Softer Line on Web
Censorship and Islamic Dress Code’, *The Guardian,* 3 July 2013,
[http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/02/iran-president-hassan-rouhani-progressive-views](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/02/iran-president-hassan-rouhani-progressive-views).

Karami, Arash. ‘Iran Cleric Explains He’s Not Opposed to “Filtered” 3G
Phones’, *Almonitor*, 1 September 2014,
[http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2014/09/iran-3g-phones-filter-unsanitary-water.html\#](http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2014/09/iran-3g-phones-filter-unsanitary-water.html\#).

Lee, Timothy B. ‘Here’s How Iran Censors the Internet’, *The Washington
Post*, 15 August 2015,
[https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2013/08/15/heres-how-iran-censors-the-internet/](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2013/08/15/heres-how-iran-censors-the-internet/).

Mehr News Agency. ‘9.5 Million Viber Users in Iran’, 5 Feb 2015,
[http://www.mehrnews.com/news/](http://www.mehrnews.com/news/).

Mohabbat-Kar Resa and Hausdorf Nicolas. ‘Internet Freedom, Snapshot of
the Case of Iran’, *Transparency for Iran*, 2010,
[http://transparency-for-iran.org/wp-content/uploads/TFI-Report.pdf](http://transparency-for-iran.org/wp-content/uploads/TFI-Report.pdf).

O’Neill, Patrick Howell. ‘The Big Money Behind Iran’s Internet
Censorship’, 22 Feb 2015,
[http://www.dailydot.com/politics/iran-censorship-circumvention-tech/](http://www.dailydot.com/politics/iran-censorship-circumvention-tech/).

Pizzi, Michael. ‘Iran Government Minister: Media Bans May Seem
“Laughable” in 5 Years’, Aljazeera America, 19 Dec 2013,
[http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2013/12/19/iranian-ministermediabansmayseemlaughablein5years.html](http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2013/12/19/iranian-ministermediabansmayseemlaughablein5years.html).

Rhoads, Christopher and Farnaz Fassihi. ‘Iran Vows to Unplug Internet’,
*Wall Street Journal*, 28 May 2011,
[http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704889404576277391449002016](http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704889404576277391449002016).

Small Media. [http://www.smallmedia.org.uk/](http://www.smallmedia.org.uk/).

The Citizen Lab. ‘Iranian Anti-Censorship Software “Simurgh” Circulated
with Malicious Backdoor’, 25 May 2015,
[https://citizenlab.org/2012/05/iranian-anti-censorship-software-simurgh-circulated-with-malicious-backdoor-2/](https://citizenlab.org/2012/05/iranian-anti-censorship-software-simurgh-circulated-with-malicious-backdoor-2/).

The World Bank. Internet Users by Country, 2014,
[http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.P2](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.P2).

[^1]: ‘New Ahangaran’ means, a new eulogy from Sadegh Ahangaran, an
    iconic eulogist during Iran-Iraq war in the 1980s. His performance
    encouraged many young Iranians to volunteer in the war.

[^2]: Setareh Derakhshesh, Breaking the Law to go Online in Iran, *New
    York Times*, 24 June 2014,
    [http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/25/opinion/breaking-the-law-to-go-online-in-iran.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/25/opinion/breaking-the-law-to-go-online-in-iran.html).

[^3]: Iran’s Internet Penetration Management Portal, 2014, Penetration
    Rate Report, 2014, [http://www.iriu.ir/matma/](http://www.iriu.ir/matma/); The World Bank,
    Internet users by country, 2014,
    [http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.P2](http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.P2).

[^4]: Mehr News Agency, ‘9.5 Million Viber users in Iran’, 5 Feb 2015,
    [http://www.mehrnews.com/news/](http://www.mehrnews.com/news/).

[^5]: Kyle Bowen and James Marchant, ‘Internet Censorship in Iran:
    Preventative, Interceptive, and reactive’, *Small Media report:
    Revolution decoded*, 2014, p.26,
    [http://smallmedia.org.uk/revolutiondecoded/](http://smallmedia.org.uk/revolutiondecoded/).

[^6]: Thomas Erdbrink, ‘Tehran unfetters cell phones, and the pictures
    start flowing’, *The New York Times*, 2 September 2014,
    [http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/03/world/asia/iran-speeds-up-cellphone-connections.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/03/world/asia/iran-speeds-up-cellphone-connections.html).

[^7]: Small Media, [http://www.smallmedia.org.uk/](http://www.smallmedia.org.uk/).

[^8]: Christopher Rhoads and Farnaz Fassihi, ‘Iran vows to unplug
    internet’, *Wall Street Journal*, 28 May 2011,
    [http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704889404576277391449002016](http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748704889404576277391449002016).

[^9]: Iranian Student News Agency, 69 Per cent of Iranian Youth use
    Anti-filtering, According to the Findings of a New Survey, 27 April
    2015, [http://isna.ir/fa/news/](http://isna.ir/fa/news/).

[^10]: Small Media, [http://smallmedia.org.uk/](http://smallmedia.org.uk/).

[^11]: Saeed Kamali-Dehghan, ‘Iran’s President Signals Softer Line on
    Web Censorship and Islamic Dress Code’, *The Guardian,* 3 July 2013,
    [http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/02/iran-president-hassan-rouhani-progressive-views](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/02/iran-president-hassan-rouhani-progressive-views).

[^12]: Freedom House, ‘Country Report for End Users in Iran’, 2011,
    [https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/LOtF\_Iran.pdf](https://freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/LOtF\_Iran.pdf).

[^13]: Small Media, [http://www.smallmedia.org.uk/](http://www.smallmedia.org.uk/).

[^14]: Patrick Howell O’Neill, ‘The Big Money Behind Iran’s Internet
    Censorship’, *The Daily Dot,* 22 Feb 2015,
    [http://www.dailydot.com/politics/iran-censorship-circumvention-tech/](http://www.dailydot.com/politics/iran-censorship-circumvention-tech/).

[^15]: Resa Mohabbat-Kar and Nicolas Hausdorf, ‘Internet Freedom,
    Snapshot of the Case of Iran’, *Transparency for* *Iran*, 2010,
    [http://transparency-for-iran.org/wp-content/uploads/TFI-Report.pdf](http://transparency-for-iran.org/wp-content/uploads/TFI-Report.pdf),
    p.45.

[^16]: It was recently announced that a malicious copy of this software
    has been circulated as ‘Simurgh-setup.zip’ that compromises all
    information on the infected computer. See: The Citizen Lab, ‘Iranian
    Anti-Censorship Software “Simurgh” Circulated with Malicious
    Backdoor’, 25 May 2015,
    [https://citizenlab.org/2012/05/iranian-anti-censorship-software-simurgh-circulated-with-malicious-backdoor-2/](https://citizenlab.org/2012/05/iranian-anti-censorship-software-simurgh-circulated-with-malicious-backdoor-2/).

[^17]: Timothy B. Lee, ‘Here’s How Iran Censors the Internet’, *The
    Washington Post*, 15 August 2015,
    [https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2013/08/15/heres-how-iran-censors-the-internet/](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/wp/2013/08/15/heres-how-iran-censors-the-internet/).

[^18]: Arash Karami, ‘Iran Cleric Explains He’s Not Opposed to
    “Filtered” 3G Phones, *Almonitor*, 1 September 2014,
    [http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2014/09/iran-3g-phones-filter-unsanitary-water.html\#](http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2014/09/iran-3g-phones-filter-unsanitary-water.html\#).

[^19]: Michael Pizzi, ‘Iran Government Minister: Media Bans May Seem
    “laughable” in 5 years’, Aljazeera America, 19 Dec 2013,
    [http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2013/12/19/iranian-ministermediabansmayseemlaughablein5years.html](http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2013/12/19/iranian-ministermediabansmayseemlaughablein5years.html).
