---
Pr-id: Publications
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 18
Type (formerly called Item): book 
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 
Article-title: Geoblocking and Global Video Culture
Article-status: accepted
Authors: Ramon Lobato, James Meese, Juan Llamas-Rodriguez, Cameran Ashraf, Marketa Trimble, Adam Rugg, Florian Hoof, Roland Burke, Jinying Li, Çiğdem Bozdağ, Chris Baumann, Aneta Podkalicka, Chris Baumann, Sandra Hanchard, Vanessa Mendes Moreira de Sa, Hadi Sohrabi, Fidel Alejandro Rodriguez, Evan Elkins.
Author-email: rlobato@swin.edu.au, James.Meese@uts.edu.au
Author-bio:
Abstract: Video platforms like Youtube, IPlayer, DailyMotion, Netflix, Periscope and Youku use geoblocking to filter international audiences. Geoblocking and Global Video Culture examines the geography of video streaming across different cultures. Studying the linkages between various blocking and circumvention practices and the tactics people use to get around them. The research decodes the approach to geoblocking in various countries like China, Iran, Malaysia, Turkey, Cuba, Brazil, USA, Sweden and Australia, by analyzing how different users negotiate geoblocking and internet filtering controls. This collection of essays offer a series of distinctive stories about this fast-changing and complex issue. Keywords:internet censorship, copyright, Institute of Network Cultures, video distribution, public sphere, proxy filtering, P2P file-sharing, territorialisation, geographies of control, surveillance, VPN, connectivity, anonymity, IP-address, digital infrastructure, USA, China, Sweden, Turkey, Australia, Malaysia, Brazil, Iran, Cuba, piracy, privacy, streaming aggregation platforms, mobile video culture, authorized and unauthorized channels, site-blocking, circumvention practices 
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)
Font(s) used: Open Sans
...


#Biographies**Luis Felipe Alvarez León** is a Ph.D. Candidate in Geography at the University of California, Los Angeles. His areas of interest are geospatial technologies and the political economic geography of information and communication. He is currently researching the geography of digital information economies. **Cameran Ashraf** is an international human rights consultant and co-founder of AccessNow, a global human rights organization selected as finalist for the 2010 Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, Europe's highest human rights honor. He completed his Ph.D. at UCLA on the geopolitics of internet control and cyberwar.**Chris Baumann** is a PhD Candidate in the Department of Media Studies at Stockholm University. He is currently busy working on a dissertation about streaming media players. His research interests include media and information technologies in the domestic space, digital distribution, and media access.**Çiğdem Bozdağ** is an assistant professor in the New Media department at the Kadir Has University, İstanbul. Her research and teaching interests are digital media, media and socio-cultural change, globalization, inter- and transcultural Communication and ICTs in education.**Roland Burke** is a senior lecturer in history at La Trobe University.  He is the author of Decolonization and the Evolution of International Human Rights and has published widely on the history of international human rights and internationalism.  **Benjamin Burroughs** is an assistant professor of emerging media in the Hank Greenspun School of Journalism and Media Studies at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. His research focuses on streaming media and technology, media industries, and digital media. His work has been published in journals such as New Media and Society, Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, and Games and Culture.**Behzad Dowran** is a faculty member in Iranian Research Institute for Information Science & Technology (IranDoc), Tehran. His research and teaching interests are social identity, new ICTs, and media studies. **Evan Elkins** is visiting assistant professor of Media, Journalism, and Film at Miami University. He is currently working on a book manuscript about regional restrictions in digital media technologies. He researches various issues surrounding digital media, media industries, globalization, and cultural identity.**Sandra Hanchard** completed her PhD at the Swinburne Institute for Social Research, Swinburne University of Technology, on social media information and everyday life in Malaysia. She has an industry background in big data analytics and data visualisation. Sandra is the founder of DataViz My, which facilitates the Data Science Primer course for the Malaysian Global Innovation and Creativity Centre.**Florian Hoof** is an assistant professor in the Department of Film and Media Studies at Goethe University Frankfurt. He conducts research on digital network markets, piracy and media sports and has published on the media history of consulting knowledge and managerial decision-making systems.**Juan Llamas-Rodriguez** is a PhD Candidate in Film and Media Studies at the University of California, Santa Barbara, working on a dissertation about life in the age of narco-trafficking. His research encompasses the materiality of media distribution, popular cultures of the Mexico-US border, and the precarity of contemporary labor.**Jinying Li** is assistant professor of Film Studies at University of Pittsburgh. Her research focuses on the media and visual culture of East Asia. Her essays have been published in Film International, Mechademia, and The International Journal of Communication, and Camera Obscura. **Ramon Lobato** is Senior Research Fellow at the Swinburne Institute for Social Research, Swinburne University of Technology, in Melbourne. His research focuses on the global dynamics of media distribution, copyright, and piracy. He is the author of Shadow Economies of Cinema: Mapping Informal Film Distribution and The Informal Media Economy (with Julian Thomas).**James Meese** is a lecturer in communication at the University of Technology Sydney. He conducts research on copyright law, mobile media, privacy law and media regulation and has published research in Television and New Media and the International Journal of Communication. **Vanessa Mendes Moreira De Sa** completed her Ph.D. at the University of Western Sydney. Her research interests lie in the area of media piracy with a focus on television distribution on the internet. Her work has been published in the International Journal of Communication and in the edited collection Piracy: Leakages From Modernity.**Aneta Podkalicka** is a research fellow at the Swinburne Institute for Social Research, Swinburne University of Technology, in Melbourne. Her current work focuses on media and consumption, including thrift-related consumption and sustainable practices. She is currently working on a book on media-based projects for social change with her colleague Ellie Rennie.**Hadi Sohrabi** is a lecturer in sociology at Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne. His research interests include sociology of the internet and ethnic studies. He has published on the politics of the internet in Iran and Muslims in Australia. **Marketa Trimble** is the Samuel Lionel Intellectual Property Professor of Law at the William S. Boyd School of Law, University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Her major areas of expertise are public and private international law of intellectual property, including conflict of laws, transnational litigation, and enforcement of intellectual property rights on the Internet. **Fidel A. Rodríguez Fernández** is Professor of Hypermedia Communication at Havana University. He researches multimedia discourse on social networks in Cuba, the circulation of digital objects, migration and video games. He is also a journalist and multimedia producer.**Adam Rugg** is a PhD candidate in Media Studies at the University of Iowa. His research examines the evolution of sports video distribution and consumption amidst emerging digital media infrastructures. His work has been published in the Journal of Electronic Broadcasting and Media and Popular Communication. 